American Economic Association
The Economics of Rotating Savings and Credit Associations
Author(s): Timothy Besley, Stephen Coate, Glenn Loury
Source: The American Economic Review, Vol. 83, No. 4 (Sep., 1993), pp. 792-810
Published by: American Economic Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2117579 .
Accessed: 16/01/2011 09:24
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at .
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=aea. .
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
American Economic Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The
American Economic Review.
http://www.jstor.org

The Economics of Rotating Savings 
and Credit Associations 
By TIMOTHY BESLEY, STEPHEN COATE, AND GLENN LoURY* 
This paper analyzes the economic role and performance of a type of financial 
institution which is observed worldwide: rotating savings and credit associations 
(Roscas). Using a model in which individuals save for an indivisible durable 
consumption good, we study Roscas which distribute funds using random 
allocation and bidding. Each type of Rosca allows individuals without access to 
credit markets to improve their welfare, but under a reasonable assumption on 
preferences, random allocation is preferred when individuals have identical 
tastes. This conclusion need not hold when individuals are heterogeneous. 
We also discuss the sustainability of Roscas given the possibility of default. 
(JEL 016, 017, G20) 
This paper studies rotating savings and 
credit associations (Roscas). These are in- 
formal financial institutions which are found 
all over the world.' They are most common 
in developing countries but are also used by 
immigrant groups in the United States (see 
e.g., Ivan Light, 1972; Aubrey W. Bonnett, 
1981). Furthermore, many of the U.S. sav- 
ings and loan associations seem to have 
started life as Roscas (see Edwin Symons 
and James White, 1984; Richard Grossman, 
1992). Roscas constitute one of a number of 
institutions, share-cropping being another 
example, whose existence is pervasive in 
developing economies and demands some 
explanation. Yet while their prevalence and, 
to some degree, robustness has fascinated 
anthropologists, they have attracted surpris- 
ingly little attention from economists.2 Our 
object in this paper and its companion piece 
(Besley et al., 1992) is therefore to initiate 
an analysis of their economic role and per- 
formance. 
The considerable literature on Roscas re- 
veals much variation in how they actually 
work in practice, but two main varieties can 
be identified. The first, and most prevalent, 
type allocates its funds randomly. In a ran- 
dom Rosca, members commit to putting a 
fixed sum of money into a "pot" for each 
*Besley: Woodrow Wilson School and Department 
of Economics, Princeton University, Bendheim Hall, 
Princeton, NJ 08544-1022; Coate: Department of Eco- 
nomics, University of Pennsylvania, 3718 Locust Walk, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297; Loury: Department of 
Economics, Boston University, 270 Bay State Road, 
Boston, MA 02215. We are grateful to Anne Case, 
Richard Zeckhauser, two referees of this journal, and 
seminar participants at Boston University, Cambridge, 
Cornell, Harvard, Northwestern, Oxford, Penn, Prince- 
ton, and Queen's for their helpful comments on vari- 
ous parts of this research. We also thank Peter Walker 
for excellent research assistance and the Center for 
Energy Policy Studies at M.I.T., the Lynde and Harry 
Bradley Foundation, and the Japanese Corporate As- 
sociates Program at the Kennedy School of Govern- 
ment, Harvard University, for financial support. 
1Roscas travel under many different names; chit 
funds in India, susu in Ghana, tontines in Senegal, 
njangis in Cameroon, cheetu in Sri Lanka, and 
pasanakus in Bolivia are just a few examples. 
2The classic anthropological studies of Roscas are 
by Clifford Geertz (1962) and Shirley Ardener (1964). 
The latter paper is particularly recommended as an 
introduction to the literature; see also Donald V. Kurtz 
(1973) and Douglass G. Norville and James S. Wehrly 
(1969). Phillipe Callier (1990) provides an economic 
interpretation of Roscas. For informal economic analy- 
ses of Roscas in particular countries, see Dale W. 
Adams and Marie L. Canavesi de Sahonero (1989) on 
Bolivia, Robert T. Anderson (1966) and S. Radhakrish- 
nan et al. (1975) on India, Girma Begashaw (1978) on 
Ethiopia, Edgar Fernando (1986) on Sri Lanka, and 
Adeniyi Osuntogun and Remi Adeyemo (1981) on 
Nigeria. 
792 

VOL. 83 NO. 4 
BESLEYETAL.: ECONOMICS OF ROSCAS 
793 
period of the life of the Rosca.3 Lots are 
drawn, and the pot is randomly allocated to 
one of the members. In the next period, the 
process repeats itself, except that the previ- 
ous winner is excluded from the draw for 
the pot. The process continues, with every 
past winner excluded, until each member of 
the Rosca has received the pot once. At this 
point, the Rosca is either disbanded or be- 
gins over again. 
Roscas may also allocate the pot using a 
bidding procedure. We shall refer to this 
institution as a bidding Rosca. One individ- 
ual receives the pot in an earlier period 
than another by bidding more, in the form 
of a pledge of higher contributions to the 
Rosca, or one-time side payments to the 
other Rosca members. Under a bidding 
Rosca, individuals may still receive the pot 
only once-the 
bidding process merely es- 
tablishes priority.4 
We take the view, documented in the 
extensive informal literature on Roscas, that 
these institutions are primarily used to save 
up for the purchase of indivisible durable 
goods.5 Random Roscas are not particularly 
effective as institutions for buffering against 
risk, since the probability of obtaining the 
pot need not be related to one's immediate 
circumstances. Even bidding Roscas, which 
may allow a member to obtain the pot im- 
mediately, only permit individuals to deal 
with situations that cannot recur, since the 
pot may be obtained no more than once. 
Furthermore, since many kinds of risks in 
LDC's are covariant, individuals will have 
high valuations at the same instant. Roscas 
do play a greater role in transferring re- 
sources to meet life-cycle needs, such as 
financing a wedding. However, even in this 
context, they seem more appropriate for 
dealing with significant, idiosyncratic events, 
rather than the hump saving required for 
old age. 
Despite its manifest importance, there has 
been relatively little work in the savings 
literature on the notion of saving up to buy 
an indivisible good. Yet, the existence of 
indivisible goods is a reason for developing 
institutions which mediate funds. In the ab- 
sence of access to external funds, individu- 
als must save to finance lumpy expenditures 
and can gain from trading with one another; 
the savings of some individuals can finance 
the purchases of others. This is not true 
when all goods are divisible, since gradual 
autarkic accumulation is efficient in the ab- 
sence of heterogeneity. 
Roscas provide a means of making joint 
savings work.6 They also determine a rule 
for rationing access to the indivisible good: 
random allocation in a random Rosca and 
bidding in a bidding Rosca. We use a two- 
good model with indivisibilities to make 
precise how a group of individuals without 
access to credit markets may improve their 
welfare by forming a random or bidding 
Rosca. We demonstrate how these institu- 
tions work and examine their impact on 
savings rates. We also compare random and 
bidding Roscas, focusing on their relative 
performance in terms of their members' 
welfare. With homogeneous 
individuals, 
randomization is preferred to bidding as a 
3Some forms of Roscas may require members to 
make in-kind contributions. An example of this form 
which may be familiar to the reader is that of "barn 
raisings," which were common among 19th-century 
frontier farmers in the United States. Consider a group 
of farmers living in the same region, each of whom 
wants to build a new barn. On the first Sunday in every 
month, the group gets together and builds a new barn 
for one of the farmers selected at random. They recon- 
vene the next month and do the same, continuing until 
each member in the group has a barn. 
4While bidding and drawing lots seem to be the two 
most common ways of allocating the pot, it is also 
sometimes allocated according to need or known crite- 
ria, such as age or kinship seniority. The reader is 
referred to Ardener (1964) for a more detailed discus- 
sion. 
5Common examples are bicycles and tin roofs. See 
Fritz Bouman (1977) and Geertz (1962) for more dis- 
cussion of the various uses for the pot. 
6This was clearly recognized by Ardener (1964 
p. 217). "The most obvious function of these associa- 
tions is that they assist in small-scale capital formation, 
or more simply, they create savings. Members could 
save their contributions themselves at home and accu- 
mulate their own 'funds,' but this would withdraw 
money from circulation: in a rotating credit association 
capital need never be idle." 

794 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
SEPTEMBER 1993 
method of allocating funds within Roscas 
under a plausible restriction on preferences. 
However, with sufficient dispersion in indi- 
viduals' valuations of the indivisible good, 
this may not be true. 
For Roscas to operate successfully it is 
necessary that individuals keep their com- 
mitment to pay into the Rosca after they 
have won the pot. This may appear prob- 
lematic since Rosca members are often not 
able to borrow in conventional credit mar- 
kets precisely because they cannot be pre- 
sumed to repay loans. Roscas circumvent 
such default problems by exploiting individ- 
uals' social connectedness. This is borne out 
in the anthropological literature, which re- 
veals how the incentive to defect from a 
Rosca is curbed by social constraints. Roscas 
are thus typically formed among individuals 
whose circumstances and characteristics are 
well known to each other. Defaulters are 
sanctioned socially as well as being pre- 
vented from any further Rosca participa- 
tion. Nonetheless, default does sometimes 
occur, and organizers of Roscas must be 
mindful of this. Thus, we discuss how con- 
cerns about default influence the design and 
performance of Roscas. 
The remainder of this paper is organized 
as follows. Section I sets up the model. 
Section -11 describes how Roscas work and 
can improve over autarky. Section III pro- 
vides comparisons of lifetime utilities and 
other features of the resource allocations 
under random and bidding Roscas. In Sec- 
tion IV, we extend the comparison to allow 
for the possibility of heterogeneous tastes. 
Section V discusses how considerations of 
sustainability may influence the design of 
Roscas, and Section VI concludes. 
I. The Model 
We use the simplest model that can cap- 
ture the essential features of the problem at 
hand. A group of n individuals would each 
like to own an indivisible durable consump- 
tion good. The group is assumed to have no 
access to credit markets. Thus they may be 
villagers in a traditional society or members 
of an immigrant group, unfamiliar with the 
banking practices of their new country. Each 
individual lives for T years, receiving an 
exogenous flow of income over his lifetime 
of y > 0. We assume, at first, that individu- 
als have identical, intertemporally additive 
preferences. 
Each individual's instanta- 
neous utility depends on nondurable- con- 
sumption, c, and on whether or not he 
enjoys the services of the durable. The 
durable does not depreciate and can be 
purchased at a given cost of B. Once pur- 
chased, it yields a constant flow of services 
for the remainder of an individual's life- 
time. We also assume that the durable's 
services are not fungible across individuals; 
one must own it to benefit from its services. 
For simplicity, there is no discounting, 
which precludes any motive for saving or 
borrowing apart from the desire to acquire 
the durable. An individual's instantaneous 
utility with nondurable consumption c is 
v(, c) if he owns the durable, and v(O, c) 
otherwise. We assume that v(O, *) and 
v(1, ) are increasing, strictly concave, and 
three times continuously differentiable in 
their second argument, using v'(i, c), v"(i, c), 
and so forth to denote differentiation of 
v(i, - ) with respect to c, for i = 0 or 1. 
Given c, we define Av(c) 
v(1, c) - v(0, c) 
to be the instantaneous gain in utility from 
owning the durable, and v(a,c) =av(1,c) 
+(1- a)v(O,c), 
for O?<? <1, as the ex- 
pected instantaneous utility when a is the 
probability of owning the durable. 
Our results require some further struc- 
ture on preferences. The first, innocuous, 
condition is that Av(c) > 0 for all c 2 0, 
which says only that individuals like the 
durable. We will also assume that Av'(c) 2 0 
(i.e., that the marginal utility of nondurable 
consumption is not decreased by owning the 
durable). This is critical for much of our 
analysis and can be interpreted as saying 
that durable services and nondurable con- 
sumption are complements. We regard the 
assumption as reasonable for many of the 
uses to which Rosca funds are put- 
purchasing a bicycle, a household appliance, 
or a tin roof for one's house. We will, how- 
ever, indicate how the assumption affects 
our analysis as we proceed. 
Under autarky, individuals save up on 
their own. Our assumptions imply that it is 

VOL. 83 NO. 4 
BESLEYETAL.: ECONOMICS OF ROSCAS 
795 
optimal for each individual to save B at a 
constant rate y - c, over an interval [0, t].7 
Thus, lifetime utility maximization involves 
each individual choosing c and t to: 
(1) 
maximize{t-v(O,c)+(T-t)-v(1,y)} 
subject to t(y -c)= 
B, and O <c < y. Let 
(tav Ca) be the solution to (1) and let Wa be 
the maximal value of lifetime utility. 
We exploit a simple way of writing Wa. 
First, substitute for t using the constraint in 
(1). This yields a one-variable maximization 
problem involving c, and the maximand can 
be written as 
T- v(1l y)-Bt 
V(' Y) -(O 
) ] 
Next, define 
v(l, y) - v(a, c)] 
(2) 
(?)-<mii< 
L 
Y- 
O<?a <1. 
Setting a = 0 in (2), lifetime utility under 
autarky can be written as 
(3) 
Wa = T-v(l, y)-B-I(O). 
Expression (3) has an appealing interpre- 
tation, paralleled in our analysis of Roscas. 
The first term represents lifetime utility if 
the durable were free, while the second 
term is the minimal utility cost of saving up 
for the durable. This minimization trades 
off the benefit of a shorter accumulation 
period against the benefit of higher con- 
sumption during this period. Letting, c*(a) 
be the consumption level which solves (2), 
the optimal autarkic consumption rate, Ca, 
is c*(O). 
Under autarky, no individual has the 
durable good before date ta' at which time 
all n individuals receive it. Thus the ex- 
pected fraction of time that an individual 
will enjoy the services of the durable during 
the accumulation period is zero. This ex- 
plains why autarky is represented by a = 0 
in (2). Autarky is inefficient; each person 
saves at rate y - ca = B/ta 
and after an 
interval of ta / n, there are enough savings 
to buy a durable which could be given to 
one of the group members. Roscas remedy 
this inefficiency, with the cost function ,uX * ) 
measuring the extent of welfare improve- 
ment. 
Before considering Roscas, we establish 
some technical properties of ,u*) and c*(*), 
which prove useful later. The proof of the 
lemma is in the Appendix. 
LEMMA: Under the assumptions on prefer- 
ences set out above, the minimized cost ,u*) 
in (2) is a decreasing, concave function of a, 
and the cost-minimizing consumption rate 
c*( ) is an increasing function of a. Both are 
twice continuously differentiable on [0,1], 
where they satisfy the identity ,u (a) 
v'(a, c*(a)). Moreover, if v"'(i, c) > 0 for i= 
0 and 1, and if Av"(c) ? 0, then c*(.) is 
strictly convex. 
II. Roscas 
This section examines how members of a 
group may improve their welfare by forming 
either a random or a bidding Rosca. As well 
as examining how Roscas operate and raise 
lifetime utilities over autarky, we also con- 
sider their effect on savings rates. We begin 
with random Roscas. 
A. Random Roscas 
Imagine that our n-person group forms 
a random Rosca which meets at equally 
spaced dates up to ta (i.e., {ta/n, 2ta/n, 
..., tal, with contributions of B/n at each 
meeting). Each time the Rosca meets, an 
individual is randomly selected to receive 
the pot of B, allowing him to buy the 
durable. Each individual continues to save 
at rate B/ta 
over the interval [0, ta], as 
7Note that accumulation for purchase of the durable 
is not desirable at all for some parameter values. It 
follows from our analysis of (1) that an individual 
would choose to save up on his own to purchase the 
durable only if T Av(y)/B 
is sufficiently large. Here 
we shall consider only such cases where this condition 
holds. 

796 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
SEPTEMBER 1993 
under autarky, but can now expect to re- 
ceive the durable ta(n - 1)/2n sooner. Risk 
aversion is not an issue here, since from 
each individual's ex ante viewpoint, the ran- 
dom Rosca does as well as autarky in every 
state of the world, and strictly better in all 
but one.8 
A random Rosca which lasts until ta is 
only one possibility. For example, the group 
could also have met until ta /2 with contri- 
butions of B/n and a durable being bought 
after each interval of length ta /2n. Given 
the uniform spacing of meeting dates and 
the constant contribution rate, the duration 
of the Rosca will be inversely proportional 
to the rate at which the group saves and 
accumulates the durable. 
It seems natural to suppose that the 
group would agree on a length for the Rosca 
which maximizes the (ex ante expected) util- 
ity of the representative group member.9 
To characterize this length and the implied 
savings rate, consider a "general" ran- 
dom Rosca of length t, meeting at the 
dates {t / n, 2 t / n, ..., t), with members con- 
tributing B/n 
at each meeting date. A 
representative 
member 
of the 
Rosca 
views his receipt date for the pot (and 
hence the durable) as a random vari- 
able, ~, distributed uniformly on the set 
{t/n, 
2t/n,...,t). 
Each member saves at 
rate B / t over the life of the Rosca, and 
nondurable consumption is thus c = y - 
B/ t during this period. Given c, each mem- 
ber's lifetime utility is the random variable: 
X v(O, c) + (t - i) v(1, c) + (T - t) v(1, y), 
where t = B/(y - c). Lifetime expected 
utility in this random Rosca is the expected 
value of the expression above, and since 
E(X) = [(n + 1)/2n]t, each member's ex-ante 
welfare is 
(4) 
W(c)- =( 
2n ) v(0, c) + (n 
v(l, c)] 
+ (T-t)v(l, 
y) 
where t = B/(y 
- c). 
The group's problem is now to choose t 
(or equivalently c), to maximize (4). Let tr 
denote the optimal length, cr the associated 
consumption rate, and Wr the maximal value 
of expected utility. This problem is similar 
to that encountered under autarky. Indeed, 
defining a = (n - 1)/2n, (4) may be rear- 
ranged as follows: 
W(c) = T v(1, y -B [ 
] 
By analogy with the reasoning leading to 
(3), we obtain 
(5) 
Wr=T-v(1,y)-B 
1y(a-) 
with cr = 0(ii). 
The interpretation is the same as that of 
(3): welfare is the difference between what 
lifetime utility would be were the durable a 
free good and the minimal (expected) utility 
cost of saving up for its purchase. This cost 
is lower under the random Rosca than un- 
der autarky because each member expects 
to enjoy the durable's services for a fraction 
a of the time in which he is saving up for 
the durable. It is now easy to establish the 
following proposition. 
PROPOSITION 1: By forming a random 
Rosca, group members raise their expected 
lifetime utilities. The optimal random Rosca 
involves members saving at a lower rate over 
a longer interval than under autarky. Never- 
theless, if v "'(i, c) > 0 for i = 0 and 1, and if 
8This is also noted by Callier (1990 p. 274). "The 
creation of a tontine is one of the most obvious Pareto 
improvements that people who save in order to pur- 
chase a bulky asset can create for themselves in a 
society with fragmented capital markets.... The pool- 
ing of resources reduces the time of 'waiting' before 
the purchase for all participants except the one who is 
last collecting the kitty (who nevertheless does not have 
to wait more than if he had saved alone)." 
9In Cameroon the typical length of njangis is two 
years (see James Brooke, 1987). The cundina in Mexico 
last between one and two years according to Kurtz 
(1973). These lengths seem to be broadly in line with 
many other studies of Roscas that we have found. The 
literature reveals considerable variation in the size of 
Roscas. Most seem to range from 10 to 20 members 
although Osuntogun and Adeyemo (1981) report 
Roscas' as large as 100 members in southwestern Nige- 
ria. 

VOL. 83 NO. 4 
BESLEYETAL.: ECONOMICS OF ROSCAS 
797 
Av"(c) > 0, then individuals expect to receive 
the durable good sooner in the optimal ran- 
dom Rosca than under autarky (i.e., 
tr > 
ta > (n + 1)tr /2n). 
PROOF: 
Equations (5) and (3) imply that Wr - 
Wa= B[,u O) - p_(a)]. This is positive since, 
as stated in the lemma, ,uX ) is a decreas- 
ing function; so group members' expected 
utility is higher in the random Rosca 
than under autarky. The lemma also estab- 
lished that c*(*) is increasing. Therefore 
consumption is greater as well, since cr= 
c*(a)> c*(O) = ca. However, the constraint 
t(y - c) = B applies under both autarky and 
the random Rosca. Hence tr > ta, and the 
optimal random Rosca involves members 
saving at a lower rate over a longer interval 
than under autarky. 
To prove that the expected receipt date 
under the optimal random Rosca is sooner 
than that under autarky we have to show 
that ta > (n + 1)tr /2n = (1 - 
a)tr. 
Since 
ta= B/[y-c*(O)] 
and tr = B/[y-c*(Z0), 
it will suffice to show that y -c*(Z)> 
(1 - a-)[ y - c*(0)]. Now, in view of the as- 
sumed concavity of v(1, *), inspection of (2) 
reveals that y = c*(1). Therefore, we need 
to show that c*(1) + (1 - a})c*(0) > c*(ii). 
This follows from Jensen's inequality and 
the convexity of c*(*) established under 
these hypotheses in the lemma. 
Welfare is raised by forming a Rosca be- 
cause some financial intermediation reduces 
everyone's utility cost of saving up. This 
conclusion is independent of any restric- 
tions we imposed on preferences other than 
individuals' liking the durable. Showing that 
nondurable consumption is higher and the 
accumulation period is longer under the 
random Rosca does require the assumption 
that durable services and nondurable con- 
sumption are complements. The result that 
individuals receive the durable earlier on 
average under the random Rosca is less 
general, requiring the assumption, of posi- 
tive third derivatives stated in Proposition 1. 
The ranking of random Roscas and au- 
tarky does not hold ex post since, though 
individuals have the same prospects ex ante, 
their circumstances differ once the order of 
receipt has been determined. Using the in- 
dex i to denote the person who wins the pot 
at the ith meeting, at date tr(j / n), ex post 
utilities under the random Rosca are given 
by 
(6) 
Ur=tr[ ()V(O,Cr)+ 
(1--)V(1,Cr) 
+(T-tr)V(1,Cr) 
i= ,...,n. 
Since his consumption/receipt-date pair 
(Cr, tr) is feasible, but not optimal, under 
autarky, the individual receiving the pot at 
the final meeting date (i = n) has been made 
strictly worse off (ex post) by joining the 
random Rosca. 
B. Bidding Roscas 
Suppose now that individuals bid for the 
right to receive the pot at a certain date 
(i.e., they form a bidding Rosca). We as- 
sume that Rosca members determine the 
order of receipt for the pot when the Rosca 
is initially organized at time zero.10 Since 
there is no uncertainty, this does not seem 
unreasonable. By a "bid" we mean a pledge 
to contribute a certain amount to the Rosca 
at a constant rate over its life, in exchange 
for the right to receive the pot at a certain 
meeting date. A higher bid would naturally 
entitle an individual to an earlier receipt 
date. 
Of the many auction protocols that could 
be imagined, all must result in individuals 
being indifferent among bid/receipt-date 
pairs, since individuals have identical pref- 
erences and complete information. More- 
over, any efficient auction procedure must 
be structured so that total contributions 
committed through bids are just adequate 
to finance acquisition of the durable by the 
recipient of the pot at each meeting date. 
10The literature reveals considerable variation in 
the bidding procedures used in practice. See Ardener 
(1964) and Fernando (1986) for discussions of particu- 
lar cases. 

798 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
SEPTEMBER 1993 
This precludes both redundant savings 
within the Rosca and the necessity to save 
outside of the Rosca. 
The two requirements that individuals are 
indifferent among bid/receipt pairs and that 
the sum of the contributions equals the cost 
of the durable completely determine the 
outcome of the bidding procedure. Thus it 
is unnecessary to commit to a particular 
auction protocol. However, to provide a 
concrete example, fix the duration t of the 
bidding Rosca and suppose that a series of 
n -1 oral, ascending-bid auctions are held 
at date zero among n group members, de- 
termining in sequence who receives the pot 
at each meeting date except the last, with 
each winner excluded from participation in 
subsequent auctions. The last remaining in- 
dividual has his contribution set so that the 
sum of all commitments just equals the 
durable's cost, B. It is easy to see, using a 
backward-induction argument, that every 
(subgame-perfect) equilibrium of this bid- 
ding mechanism leaves all individuals at the 
same level of lifetime utility. Moreover, by 
construction, the winning bids (plus the last 
recipient's contribution) will sum to the cost 
of the durable. We now show how to char- 
acterize these equilibrium bids. 
If the bidding Rosca lasts until time t, 
bidding determines who receives the dur- 
able at each of the meeting dates {t/n, 
2t/n, 
. . .,t}. Let bi denote the promised 
contribution of individual i, defined to be 
the one who wins the pot at time (i/n)t. A 
set of bids {bi}l 1 constitutes an equilibrium 
if (i) no individual could do better by out- 
bidding another for his place in the queue 
and (ii) contributions are sufficient to allow 
each participant to acquire the durable upon 
receiving the pot. 
If Rosca member i bids bi, he will have 
nondurable consumption ci = y - (n / t)bi at 
each moment during the Rosca's life. Thus, 
we can characterize the Rosca in terms of 
the consumption rates: {ci}li' 1. Condition (ii) 
implies that individual i's equilibrium utility 
level is 
t 
u(O,Tcj)(+ ,n) 
ci) 
+ (T -t) 
v(1, y) 
in a bidding Rosca of length t. Letting ac 
equal (n - i)/n, condition (i) implies, for all 
individuals i and some number x, that 
(7) 
v(ati, ci) =x 
i =l, ... ,n. 
The number x represents the members' 
common average utility during the life of a 
bidding Rosca of length t, in a bidding 
equilibrium. 
Now define c to be the average non- 
durable consumption rate of members dur- 
ing the life of the Rosca [i.e., c 
(l/n)Ei=jcj]. 
Then condition (ii) is equiva- 
lent to 
(8) 
t(y -c-) =B. 
Given the Rosca's length t, the relations (7) 
and (8) uniquely determine members' non- 
durable consumption rates and their aver- 
age utility over the life of the Rosca, consis- 
tent with bidding equilibrium. Equivalently, 
one could take as given the equilibrium 
average utility level for the duration of the 
Rosca, x. Then (7) gives individuals' equi- 
librium consumption levels, 
{Ci}i' 1; and 
these, via (8), can be used to find the Rosca's 
length, t. 
As in the random Rosca, it is natural to 
assume that the length of the bidding Rosca 
is chosen to maximize the common utility 
level of its members. The foregoing discus- 
sion and (7) imply that this common welfare 
is 
T v(l, y) - B{[v(, 
y)- x]/[y 
-]. 
Now let c^(a, x) be the function satisfying 
v(a, c^) =- x, and define 
1 n 
)- 
Then, when the equilibrium average utility 
during a bidding Rosca is x, c^(ai, x) is 
individual i's nondurable consumption rate 
during the Rosca, and B/[ y - c(x)] is the 
Rosca's length. Denote by tb and Wb, re- 
spectively, the duration and common utility 
level of the optimal bidding Rosca. Then, 

VOL. 83 NO. 4 
BESLEYETAL.: ECONOMICS OFROSCAS 
799 
using by now familiar arguments, we may 
write the following:" 
(9) 
Wb= Tv(1, y)- 
BAb 
where 
( 10) 
- 
J( I Y ) 
X ] 
[ y -(x 
J 
Letting x* give the minimum in (10), then 
tb = B/[y - c(x*)] is the length of the opti- 
mal bidding Rosca. 
Lifetime utility expressed in (9) admits 
the same interpretation noted for autarky 
and the random Rosca; it is the difference 
between lifetime utility if the durable were 
free and the minimal cost of saving up. The 
latter, determined in (10), again trades off 
higher welfare during the Rosca versus 
faster acquisition of the durable. We may 
now establish the following proposition. 
PROPOSITION 2: By forming a bidding 
Rosca, group members raise their lifetime util- 
ities relative to autarky. 
Moreover if 
1/ v'(0, - ) is concave, the optimal bidding 
Rosca involves group members saving at a 
lower average rate and over a longer interval 
than under autarky. 
PROOF: 
Equations (9) and (3) together imply that 
Wb - 
= B[,u(O)-,Ub], which is positive if 
and only if ,u(0)> 
>A 
b. Since v(a, c) in- 
creases with both a and c, c(a, x) decreases 
with a; so, 
c( v(0, c)) = 
E A(at,v(0,c)) 
r 0 ? c 
E 
re 
(O v(0, C)) 
= C 
for 0 < c < y. Therefore c(v(0, ca)) < Ca; but 
then, setting x = v(O, Ca) in (10) and com- 
paring the value of the right-hand side with 
the minimized value in (2), we see that 
A(?)/> 
Ab. Thus, by forming a bidding 
Rosca, group members raise their lifetime 
utilities. The proof of the second part of the 
proposition is given in the Appendix. 
Again, the welfare dominance of the 
Rosca over autarky requires no assumption 
on preferences other than individuals' liking 
the durable good. The greater complexity of 
the bidding Rosca is reflected in the need to 
make an assumption on the curvature of the 
inverse of the marginal utility of income 
function in order to compare the Rosca's 
savings rate to that under autarky. Concav- 
ity of this function does not follow from any 
well-known property of utility functions, 
though it is satisfied for many cases. For 
example, for isoelastic utility functions with 
v(0, c) = c1-P/(1 - p), 1/ v'(0, c) is convex if 
p > 1 and concave if p < 1. 
Unlike autarky or the random Rosca, the 
bidding Rosca leaves each individual with a 
different rate of nondurable consumption 
during the accumulation period. Earlier ac- 
quirers of the durable bid a higher contribu- 
tion to the Rosca and consume less of the 
nondurable; (c1 < ...< 
ca). Proposition 2 
also reveals that the last individual to ac- 
quire the durable in a bidding Rosca must 
have greater nondurable consumption dur- 
ing accumulation than under autarky (cn > 
Ca). These higher contributions of earlier 
recipients resemble interest payments, and 
in this sense the bidding Rosca can be 
likened to a market.12 
III. Bidding versus Random Roscas 
While we have already established that 
either type of Rosca allows a group to use 
its savings more effectively than under au- 
tarky, they do not yield identical outcomes. 
We observed above that bidding results in 
recipients of early pots forgoing consump- 
tion. The optimal savings rate may also dif- 
itIn this minimization x is restricted to a range 
defined by the requirement that the consumption levels 
Ci= c^(ai, x) must be no less than zero and no greater 
than y, i = 1. 
n. 
12Our companion paper (Besley et al., 1992) makes 
the comparison exact. 

800 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
SEPTEMBER 1993 
fer between the two institutions. Compari- 
son of these savings rates and welfare levels 
is the object of this section. In particular, 
understanding the latter may yield insight 
into the circumstances when we would ex- 
pect to observe one or the other of the 
Rosca types in practice. Our main result for 
.a homogeneous group is stated in the fol- 
lowing proposition. 
PROPOSITION 
3: Group members' ex- 
pected utility will be higher if they use a 
random rather than a bidding Rosca. If the 
value of the durable is independent of the 
nondurable consumption rate [i.e., Av'(c)- 
01, and if 1/ v'(O, ) is a convex function, 
then the optimal random Rosca involves 
members saving at a lower rate over a longer 
interval than the optimal bidding Rosca. 
PROOF: 
From (5) and (9) we see that WJ - Wb - 
B[Ab - A(" )], so we need to show that /lb > 
IL(c). The proof is simple. Using (2), the 
definition of c'(a, x), and the change of vari- 
ables x = v(a, c), we can write 
( 11) 
AO C) = min [y- 
et a, X )] 
Comparing (11) with (10) we conclude: ,t(a) 
< Pb 
if c'(, x) < c(x), for all x; but c(i, x) 
is c^(, x) evaluated at the average of ai, 
while c(x) is the average of the values 
c^(ai, x). Hence, by Jensen's inequality, our 
conclusion holds if cf *, x) is strictly convex. 
A bit of calculus shows 
dc^da = - [Av( c^)/ v'( , c^)] < 0. 
A bit more reveals 
a2C^/da2 
=-[-d c /dat][ v ( c, 
+ dc v'(a,e) i)] 
which is positive provided that Av'(c) ? 0. 
This proves the first claim of the proposi- 
tion. The proof of the second claim is given 
in the Appendix. 
Thus according to Proposition 3 our as- 
sumptions imply that individuals are better 
off using a savings association that allocates 
access to funds by lot. This may explain why 
randomization is so widely used in practice. 
Though this finding is at first sight counter- 
intuitive, a natural explanation is available. 
As will emerge in the next section, however, 
the assumption of identical preferences is 
crucial to the result; when individuals' pref- 
erences differ, bidding permits them to sort 
themselves. 
The assumption that the durable and 
nondurable goods are complements is key 
to proving that random allocation domi- 
nates bidding from an ex ante viewpoint. To 
see why, consider two Roscas of the same 
duration. Bidding requires members to have 
the same average utility over the life of the 
Rosca; random allocation requires them to 
have the same nondurable consumption 
rates. Each of these requirements consti- 
tutes a constraint on the more general 
scheme which randomly assigns members an 
order of receipt i, 1 < i < n, and a consump- 
tion rate ci, 0 < ci < y, but which requires 
neither equal consumption rates nor equal 
ex post utilities.13 Were such a scheme de- 
signed to maximize ex ante expected wel- 
fare, it would equate individuals' marginal 
utilities: v'(ai , ci) = v'(a1, Cj), 1 < i, 
< n.14 
When Av'(c) > 0, random assignment with 
equal nondurable consumption more closely 
approximates this condition than does bid- 
ding. In a bidding equilibrium, earlier recip- 
ients of the pot contribute more to the 
Rosca (lower ci) in exchange for greater 
access to the durable during the Rosca 
(higher ai). However, with Av'(c) 2 0, they 
also have higher marginal utilities than those 
13Hybrid Roscas of this sort seem not to be ob- 
served in practice. This may be due to problems of 
implementation, since losers in this lottery might pre- 
fer to join another Rosca than to continue in the 
original one. 
"Otherwise it would be possible to increase ex ante 
expected utility by increasing contributions to the Rosca 
by an individual with lower marginal utility and reduc- 
ing them for an individual with higher marginal utility, 
keeping total contributions at each meeting just equal 
to B. 

VOL. 83 NO. 4 
BESLEYETAL.: ECONOMICS OF ROSCAS 
801 
Lifetime Utility 
of Individual I 
2C 
B 
/45? 
? 0 
2C 
Lifetime Utility 
of Individual 2 
FIGURE 1. LIFETIME UTILITY POSSIBILITIES FOR A TWO-PERSON 
GROUP WITH 
TIME HORIZON T = 3 YEARS AND ROSCA LENGTH t = 2 YEARS 
Note: 6 -- Av(c) > 0 is a constant. 
receiving the pot later. This divergence of 
marginal utilities is mitigated in the random 
Rosca, which sets ci = Cr, for all i. Thus, 
when the two goods are complements, the 
equal-consumption-rate constraint of ran- 
dom allocation is less inhibiting than is the 
equal-average-utility constraint of bidding, 
and the random Rosca performs better than 
the bidding Rosca in this case.15 This is 
particularly clear when Av' 0, since equal- 
ity of consumption rates during the Rosca 
implies equality of marginal utilities. How- 
ever, equality of lifetime utilities constrains 
consumption so that the marginal utility is 
higher among those who receive the pot 
earlier. 
Figure 1 illustrates the latter case graphi- 
cally. We depict lifetime utility possibilities 
for a two-person group with time horizon 
T = 3 years, and Rosca length t = 2 years. 
The value of the durable's services, Av(c) 
( > 0, is a constant. Since total annual con- 
tributions to the Rosca must equal the 
durable's cost, total annual consumption for 
the individuals equals 2y - B during the 
life of the Rosca. By considering alternative 
nondurable consumption levels for the two 
individuals satisfying this constraint, we 
trace out two utility possibility frontiers. 
Which is relevant depends upon who gets 
the durable first. If individual 1 does, the 
relevant utility possibility frontier is located 
15Conversely, if durable and nondurable consump- 
tion are sufficiently strong substitutes, then the equal- 
average-utility constraint, by forcing ci and ai to co- 
vary negatively in the group, can produce less inequal- 
ity of marginal utilities than the equal-consumption-rate 
constraint. For example, one can easily show that, if 
v(O, c) = 1- exp(- c) and v(1, c) = v(O, c + 6), for some 
> 0, then the optimal bidding Rosca achieves the 
maximal ex ante expected utility among the more gen- 
eral schemes of the sort discussed in the text. Less 
obvious, but also true, is that this exponential form is 
necessary for the bidding Rosca to attain the more 
general maximum. 

802 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
SEPTEMBER 1993 
to the northwest in the figure, while if indi- 
vidual 2 gets the durable first, the relevant 
frontier is the one to the southeast. The 
indivisibility of the durable good causes the 
overall utility possibility set to be noncon- 
vex. 
Because a random Rosca yields equal 
nondurable consumptions, its utility alloca- 
tion is either at point A (if individual 1 wins 
the first pot) or at point B (if individual 2 
does). Note that, because Av'= 0, the slope 
of the relevant utility possibility frontier is 
-1 at points A and B; the line containing A 
and B is tangent to the two frontiers at 
those points. Since these utility allocations 
have equal probability, each individual's 
ex ante expected utility is at point C. The 
sum of expected utilities at point C is maxi- 
mal among all feasible expected utility allo- 
cations. A bidding Rosca, by making utili- 
ties equal, produces a utility allocation at 
the intersection of the two frontiers. The 
dominance of the random Rosca is now 
obvious."6 
Proposition 3 also compares the savings 
rates in random and bidding Roscas, but it 
requires that Av'(c) = 0 and imposes a re- 
striction on the curvature of 1/ v'(O, .). No 
general result appears to be available. Com- 
bining Propositions 2 and 3, in the case of 
separable logarithmic utility [i.e., where 
v(O, c) = ln(c) and v(1, c) = v(O, c) + (, 6 > 
0], then, since 1/ v'(O, c) is linear, ta < tb < 
tr. Thus, in this case institutions with higher 
ex ante welfare are also those with lower 
savings rates and longer accumulation peri- 
ods. 
IV. Roscas with Heterogeneous Individuals 
While there is some evidence that Roscas 
are formed among relatively homogeneous 
groups (see e.g., Thomas Cope and Kurtz, 
1980), there is no good reason to suppose 
that the individuals in any particular group 
have identical preferences for the durable 
and, hence, for receipt of the pot. In this 
section we show how allowing for such dif- 
ferences may reverse the ranking of the 
bidding and random Roscas from an 
ex ante viewpoint. With heterogeneous 
tastes, bids can be used to order individuals, 
with those who value the pot more acquir- 
ing it sooner. This is true whether or not 
information about tastes is private. Even if 
valuations are public information, individu- 
als can use bidding to realize "gains from 
trade" within the Rosca, as members who 
value the pot more exchange greater contri- 
butions for earlier access to the pot. When 
valuations are not commonly known, bid- 
ding plays the additional role of inducing 
individuals to reveal this information. We 
restrict attention here to the case in which 
preferences are common knowledge. 
We consider the operation of a two-per- 
son bidding Rosca."7 The preferences of 
these two individuals are as above, except 
that individual l's utility when he has the 
durable is increased by a constant, with 
individual 2's utility being reduced by the 
same constant. Thus, prior to acquiring the 
durable good, utility for both individuals is 
v(O,c); after acquiring it, individual 1 has 
utility v'(1, c) 
v(1, c)+ (, and individual 2 
has utility v2(1, c) v(1, c) - (, 
for f 2 0. 
The parameter 6 measures the difference in 
the individuals' tastes. Note that 6 = 0 is the 
case of homogeneous individuals considered 
above and that an increase in 6 yields a 
mean-preserving spread in the dispersion of 
the individuals' valuations. The key assump- 
tion is that the difference in individuals' 
valuations of the durable is independent of 
the level of nondurable consumption. Re- 
laxing this would complicate the analysis 
without adding new insights. As before, 
Vi(a,c) denotes individual i's expected util- 
ity flow at an instant when a is the probabil- 
16The failure of bidding to achieve maximal ex- 
pected utility parallels results obtained in other litera- 
tures where indivisibilities are important. See, for ex- 
ample, the model of conscription in Theodore 
Bergstrom (1986), the location models of James A. 
Mirrlees (1972) and Richard Arnott and John Riley 
(1977), and the club membership model of Arye 
Hillman and Peter Swan (1983). 
17This restriction is for notational simplicity only. 
The extension to many members is straightforward. 

VOL. 83 NO. 4 
BESLEYETAL.: ECONOMICS OFROSCAS 
803 
ity of owning the durable. Hence, v' (a, c) = 
v(a, c) + a4; and v2(a, c) = v(a, c) - a4. 
Consider a bidding Rosca of length t, 
meeting at dates t /2 and t. Let bi be 
individual i's bid, and let ci be his non- 
durable consumption rate during the Rosca. 
Then ci = y -2bJ/t. 
We will adopt the 
auction protocol described in Subsection 
II-B: an oral, ascending-bid auction where 
the winner gets the first pot and the loser's 
contribution is set to yield a total payment 
of B at each meeting date. To understand 
the outcome of such an auction, note that 
individual 1 will always exceed the bid b, if 
(12) 
v1,Y-2- 
> v1y-2 
The left-hand side of (12) is individual l's 
average utility during the Rosca if he wins 
with bid b, and the right-hand side is his 
average utility if individual 2 wins with the 
same bid. As long as (12) holds then, by 
bidding a little more than b, individual 1 
raises his welfare if his bid prevails. Since 
tastes are common knowledge, individual 2 
will exceed any bid satisfying (12) knowing 
that 1 will go higher. In this way, 2 can 
reduce the size of his own contribution. 
Thus the outcome of the auction will be 
that individual 1 wins with a bid for which 
(12) is an equality. 
In bidding equilibrium, therefore, individ- 
ual 1 will be indifferent between consump- 
tion/receipt-date pairs (c2, t) and (c1, t/2). 
Furthermore, consumption rates will satisfy 
B = (t/2X2y-c1-c2). 
These two condi- 
tions uniquely determine the equilibrium 
consumption (and hence, bids) in a bidding 
Rosca of length t.'8 We now consider the 
optimal length for such a Rosca. 
To facilitate comparison with our previ- 
ous analysis, suppose that the Rosca is utili- 
tarian, its length being chosen to maximize 
the average utility of its members. Given 
length t, let x be the average of the mem- 
bers' utility during the Rosca. In bidding 
equilibrium 
X-( 
2') [ 
1( 2',Cl)+ 
V'(0, 
C2)]. 
Since bidding equilibrium requires v'(O, c2) 
= v'(1/2, c1), we conclude that x = V(O, c2). 
Using the function c(a, x) defined in Sub- 
section II-B by the identity v(a, c^) x, write 
equilibrium consumption rates as c1 = 
c^(1/2, x - e /2) and c2 = ^(O, x). Letting 
j(x, 6) denote the average equilibrium con- 
sumption rate, we have 
j(x,6)=- [C^(2 
S x-f/2)+ 
C^(O,x)]/2 
Then the average welfare in bidding equi- 
librium is 
(13)~~~~~(1 
) 
( 13) 
W=-Tvu(1, y )B 
[Y 
cj X . )] 
Denote by Wb the level of average wel- 
fare in the optimal bidding Rosca with het- 
erogeneous preferences. Then (13) implies 
the following familiar relationship: 
(14) 
Wb-= Tuv(l, y) 
Bpb 
where 
(15) 
V 
i 
(1, y) 
x] 
x 
y -j(X, f) 
We can interpret (14) and (15) as before. 
Mean welfare in the optimal bidding Rosca 
is the difference between what it would be if 
the durable were free and the minimal cost 
of saving-up. This cost, /bI is the value of a 
minimization problem. 
It is revealing to compare the expressions 
above with the analogous equations (9) and 
(10) which apply to the homogeneous bid- 
ding Rosca. Mean welfare in the heteroge- 
18In the natural extension of this analysis to the case 
of n individuals, equilibrium consumptions will be de- 
termined by the equations: 
(i) 
vu(aj,cj) = vu(aj+1,ci+1) 
i = 1. 
n - 
(ii) 
E Ci= n[ Y 
] 

804 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
SEPTEMBER 1993 
neous case differs from that in the homoge- 
neous case only because the corresponding 
average consumption rates, c(x, e) and c(x), 
differ. In the homogeneous case 
C(X 
-[(2 
X) + C(0 
X)]/2 
Hence c(x, 0) = c(x), and so as individuals' 
tastes become more similar, the outcome 
with heterogeneity converges to the out- 
come in the homogeneous bidding Rosca. 
Moreover, since c(a, x) is increasing in x, 
we know that c(x, ) is decreasing in 6. So, 
a mean-preserving increase in the dispersion 
of members' valuations of the durable good 
reduces the mean utility cost of saving up to a 
bidding Rosca and, hence, increases the indi- 
viduals' mean welfare in bidding equilibrium. 
To see why intuitively, let individual l's 
valuation of the durable rise and let individ- 
ual 2's fall by an equal amount, holding 
fixed nondurable consumption rates. The 
change in valuations has no impact on mean 
welfare when both individuals have the 
durable, and it increases mean welfare when 
only individual 1 has it. Thus, as long as 
individual 1 has priority of access, increas- 
ing the dispersion of valuations holding 
consumption fixed raises mean welfare. Al- 
lowing consumption rates to move to their 
equilibrium levels only reinforces this effect. 
In a random Rosca, individuals 1 and 2 
consume the nondurable good at the same 
rate, and both have an even chance of ac- 
quiring the durable on either of the same 
two dates. It follows that the average of the 
two individuals' expected utilities in a ran- 
dom Rosca is independent of 6. Setting 
6 = 0 and using (5), we conclude that aver- 
age expected utility in the optimal random 
Rosca with diverse tastes, denoted W, is 
given by: 'r - T uv(1, y) - B ,u(1/4). (Since 
n = 2, a = 1/4.) We now have the following 
proposition. 
PROPOSITION 4: The average of individu- 
als' expected lifetime utilities in the optimal 
bidding Rosca exceeds that in the optimal 
random Rosca if the dispersion of individuals' 
valuations is sufficiently large. 
PROOF: 
The above discussion implies that Wb > W' 
if and only if Ab < A(1/4). Comparing (15) 
with (11) we see that Ab < L(1/4) if 
c(x*,)< 
c(1/4,x*), where x* gives the 
minimum in (11) for a-= 1/4. Writing- this 
out, we have: ,ub<A(1l/4) 
if c(1/2,x*- 
6/2) < 2c(1/4, x*) - C(O, x*). Hence, to 
conclude that Wb> W1 it suffices to know 
that 
x*- 6/2 < u(2, 2c(4, x*) - 
(0, x*)) 
or 
2> 
v(1,2c( 
,x*)-c(0, 
x*)). 
Thus, bidding dominates for high enough 
6, since the left-hand side of the above 
inequality increases with 6 and the right- 
hand side is independent of 6. Note that 
the right-hand side of the inequality is posi- 
tive since 
c( 4, x*) < {e(0, 
X*) + C(2, X*)} 
from the proof of Proposition 3. This im- 
plies that 
v( 2, 2c( 4, x*) -c(0, x*)) < x* . 
The reason for the result should be clear. 
The bidding Rosca gives the pot to the 
individual with the highest valuation first, 
while a random Rosca does not respect 
individuals' valuations. If the gain from do- 
ing this is large enough, it outweighs that 
from randomization which we demonstrated 
in the previous section. Since our welfare 
criterion is mean expected utility, the inter- 
pretation of this result is as follows: given 
sufficient heterogeneity, individuals choos- 
ing "behind the veil of ignorance" (i.e., 
before they know their tastes) would opt for 
a bidding Rosca rather than a random 
Rosca. 

VOL. 83 NO. 4 
BESLEYETAL.: ECONOMICS OF ROSCAS 
805 
This analysis of heterogeneity is limited 
by our assumption that individuals' valua- 
tions are commonly known. To relax this 
assumption would be of interest but would 
take us far afield from the concerns of the 
present paper. It is clear, however, that the 
main insight from the simplest case, that 
bidding can serve a useful sorting function, 
will be robust in the face of further analysis. 
V. The Sustainability of Roscas 
We premised our analysis on an assump- 
tion that the group of potential Rosca mem- 
bers had no access to external credit 
markets. This is not unreasonable for most 
situations where Roscas are prevalent, 
whether among an ethnic group within the 
United States or in less developed coun- 
tries. There are various reasons why particu- 
lar groups may have difficulty in obtaining 
credit in formal markets. First, immigrant 
groups or rural villagers may be intimidated 
by banks, which require their customers to 
be literate and to be familiar with certain 
banking practices. Second, groups may be 
discriminated against, and thus unable to 
obtain access to credit from regular sources. 
Third, and perhaps most importantly, banks 
may perceive the default risk of lending to 
certain groups to be too high. Default may 
occur either because borrowers face unreli- 
able income streams, and thus are unable to 
repay, or because they are unwilling to re- 
pay, with the bank having insufficient sanc- 
tions against them to make them do so. 
Typically, individuals who join Roscas tend 
to lack reliable forms of collateral which 
can be used to assuage banks' fears of non- 
repayment. 
Since those who receive the pot early are 
effectively in debt to the other group mem- 
bers, Roscas too would seem vulnerable to 
problems of nonrepayment, with individuals 
refusing to honor their membership com- 
mitment after winning the pot. However, 
there are good reasons why Roscas do not 
fall victim to the problem of deliberate de- 
fault which banks might face. The key to 
understanding Roscas is noting that, unlike 
markets, they are not anonymous institu- 
tions. They use preexisting social connec- 
tions between individuals to help circum- 
vent problems of imperfect information and 
enforceability. The rules of Roscas reflect 
concerns of this kind. For example, individ- 
uals must be appropriately vetted before 
being allowed to join. 
A typical scenario for a Rosca is a group 
of individuals from the same village or, in 
an urban setting, from the same office.19 In 
the United States, as we have noted, Roscas 
are most often formed from among an eth- 
nic group. Thus individuals are likely to 
have good information about the reliability 
of their neighbors and co-workers and can 
enforce sanctions-social and economic- 
on those who are delinquent without good 
reason. It seems central to understanding 
the sustainability of Roscas that there be 
some kind of "social collateral" among a 
group which can be harnessed in this way. 
All this explains very well why Roscas 
tend to avoid large-scale default in practice, 
and the anthropological literature on Roscas 
is replete with examples to illustrate this 
point. Summing up these, Ardener (1964 
p. 216) observes that "a member may go to 
great lengths, such as stealing or selling a 
daughter into prostitution in order to fulfill 
his obligations to his association; failure to 
meet obligations can even lead to suicide." 
Reporting on Roscas in Cameroon, a recent 
New York Times article noted that "bankers 
complain of loan delinquency rates as high 
as 50%. But [Rosca] payments are taken so 
seriously that borrowers faced with delin- 
quency have been known to commit suicide" 
(Brooke, 1987 p. 30). Perhaps ironically, the 
inability of Rosca members to enter credit 
markets actually strengthens the value of 
social sanctions, since individuals with bad 
reputations earned in Roscas may expect 
little other credit-market access.20 
19Adams and Canavesi de Sahonero (1989) conduct 
a detailed analysis of Roscas based in offices in urban 
Bolivia. 
20This may help to explain why Roscas become less 
important in the process of economic development, 
however, since as individuals' market opportunities ex- 
pand, the value of social sanctions declines, and the 
sustainability of Roscas becomes more problematic. 

806 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
SEPTEMBER 1993 
All of this notwithstanding, it would be 
misleading to ignore default entirely. Here, 
we shall examine how such considerations 
may influence the design and performance 
of Roscas. We do this within our model by 
supposing that a defaulting individual is 
subjected to social sanctions inflicted by 
other group members with an exogenously 
given utility cost of K.21 This cost might 
represent the discomfort, loss of face, and 
other social costs associated with having to 
confront the other Rosca members each day 
or, in the extreme, the costs of finding a 
new job or place to live. In a more general 
model, it might also represent the loss from 
being excluded from Rosca participation in 
the future. 
Suppose now that individuals choose 
whether or not to meet their Rosca obliga- 
tions. Then a Rosca will be established only 
if it satisfies a sustainability constraint, en- 
suring that each individual prefers to main- 
tain his contribution to the Rosca after he 
has won the pot. With identical preferences, 
this constraint takes a very simple form: it 
holds for every Rosca member if it holds for 
the first one to win the pot, the latter having 
the greatest incentive to default. 
Consider a random Rosca among n iden- 
tical individuals, as defined in Subsection 
II-A. If the consumption rate during the 
Rosca is c, then it lasts until date t and 
meets at ft / n, 2 t / n, ..., 
t}, where t = 
B/(y - c). Then, the benefit to the first 
recipient of defaulting is 
(n -1 )B [v(1,Y) - v(1,c) 
n 
l 
y- c 
(i.e., the gain from avoiding the n -1 re- 
maining contributions to the Rosca). The 
Rosca is sustainable if this benefit does not 
exceed the default cost K. Letting 
v(l, y) - V(1,C)1 
g(c, a) 
a (:x 
and with a = (n - 1)/2n as before, the sus- 
tainability constraint becomes- g(c, a) < 
K/2B. The analysis of Section II implicitly 
assumed K to be large enough for this 
constraint to be satisfied at the optimal non- 
durable consumption rate, c*(a). 
If the constraint were not satisfied, the 
allocation that we described for the random 
Rosca would not be sustainable. Fixing n, 
we can ask how the demands of sustainabil- 
ity would affect the design of the Rosca. 
Since utility is concave in c, g(c, a) de- 
creases in c, for c < y. Thus, for a given 
number of members, the sustainability con- 
straint can be accommodated only by in- 
creasing c above cr or, equivalently, in- 
creasing t above tr. Thus, deterring default 
requires increasing the duration of the 
Rosca. Holding the duration of the Rosca 
fixed, the benefit of default could be re- 
duced by lowering n. Fewer meetings im- 
plies a shorter period over which the first 
recipient of the pot might enjoy the benefits 
of default. Obviously, either of these adjust- 
ments will reduce the welfare gain from 
forming a Rosca, since the original alloca- 
tion is being further constrained.22'23 
21It would be theoretically more satisfying to have K 
determined endogenously, arising from rational behav- 
ior by the individuals in some extended version of the 
model. A natural way of doing this would be to posit a 
sequence of Roscas through time, supposing that fail- 
ure to perform in the past results in future exclusion 
from Rosca participation. Then K would depend posi- 
tively on the benefit of Rosca participation relative to 
autarky, and negatively on individuals' discount rates. 
22Referring to the sustainability constraint, it is also 
clear that a larger pot also may create problems of 
sustainability. This is borne out in Stephen Haggblade's 
(1978) discussions of the njangis in Cameroon. How- 
ever, he does report that some Roscas with $40,000 
pots are found there (p. 43). One imagines that the 
severity of the social sanctions associated with default 
would also be great in Roscas of this magnitude. As we 
have seen, it is the ratio of default cost to pot size, 
K/B, which matters. 
23This discussion suggests the following reformula- 
tion of the Rosca design problem: 
u (1, y) - u(a, c)1 
,u-min- 
a, c 
y- 
c 
subject to g(a, c) < K/2B, where (a, c) must also sat- 
isfy 0 < c < y, and a E {(n - 1)/2n; n = 2,3,...}. 
It is 
easy to show, by writing out the first-order conditions 
for this constrained minimization, that when the opti- 
mal random Rosca discussed earlier is not sustainable, 
a solution involves c > cr. 

VOL. 83 NO. 4 
BESLEYETAL.: ECONOMICS OF ROSCAS 
807 
Equation (5) reveals that the expected 
utility in a random Rosca of given length 
increases with n. Hence, absent considera- 
tions of sustainability, welfare is higher with 
a larger Rosca membership. In practice, 
however, we do not often observe Roscas of 
more than a few score members, and sus- 
tainability considerations would seem key to 
understanding this fact. This is especially so 
if one considers the determinants of the 
default cost, K. In larger groups it becomes 
more difficult to keep track of defecting 
members (the evidence [e.g., Haggblade, 
1978] seems to be that larger Roscas face 
bigger default problems). This effect is likely 
to outweigh the intermediation benefits of a 
larger membership in groups above a cer- 
tain size, since the marginal benefit of an- 
other member declines with the size of the 
group, while marginal monitoring and en- 
forcement costs could be expected to in- 
crease. 
The issues of sustainability are broadly 
similar for bidding Roscas. We should em- 
phasize, however, that, because bidding for 
priority forces a heavier obligation upon 
earlier recipients, the incentive issues are 
more serious. Moreover, there is an inter- 
esting complication if individuals differ with 
respect to their susceptibility to social sanc- 
tions and if this difference is private infor- 
mation. Those individuals who care little 
about such sanctions would have a further 
incentive to bid in order to get the pot 
early, knowing that they need not continue 
paying into the Rosca after winning the pot. 
Thus, bidding brings along its own adverse- 
selection problem. 
Our discussion of sustainability has so far 
focused exclusively on the problem of will- 
ingness to continue making payments into 
the Rosca, rather than ability to do so. The 
latter might also be a problem if individuals' 
incomes are stochastic, since then they might 
sometimes be unable to contribute. The an- 
thropological literature indicates that on 
some occasions Roscas serve a risk-sharing 
role, with one or more members paying the 
contributions of another. Problems of moral 
hazard and adverse selection seem less likely 
to pervade such "insurance" schemes than 
in other contexts, because of the social con- 
nectedness of Rosca members. 
VI. Concluding Remarks 
This paper has investigated the economic 
role and performance of Roscas. We have 
sought their rationale in the fact that some 
goods are indivisible, a fact which makes 
autarkic saving inefficient. We have argued 
here that Roscas can be understood as a- 
response by a socially connected group to 
credit-market exclusion. This seems broadly 
consistent with what we see in practice. We 
have made precise how Roscas improve over 
autarky and have compared random and 
bidding Roscas. We found that the indivisi- 
bilities which might motivate the existence 
of Roscas can explain why random alloca- 
tion is so widely used. However, with suffi- 
cient dispersion of the valuations of the 
durable goods, bidding may be preferred as 
a means of allocating rights to the pot. 
Our analysis also discussed the problem 
of sustainability, and we pointed out some 
of the constraints that this might impose. In 
general it may necessitate operating Roscas 
with fewer members and longer durations 
than would otherwise be desirable. Sustain- 
ability seems likely to be more of a problem 
in bidding than random Roscas, since the 
gains from early default are greater, and 
individuals with the lowest disutility from 
social disapproval and sanctions have a 
stronger incentive to bid in order to obtain 
the pot early. 
The analysis suggests a number of inter- 
esting avenues for empirical investigation. 
While there are many studies of Roscas, 
few have tried to test concrete theoretical 
hypotheses. Our analysis suggests at least 
three directions in which this might go. First, 
there are questions about Rosca member- 
ships: do the groups appear to be homoge- 
neous, and what social connections between 
group members circumvent the problem of 
default? Second, there are questions of 
Rosca design-their length, their savings 
rates, and whether bidding or random allo- 
cation is used. On the last issue our model 
gives predictions in terms of the structure of 
preferences and the heterogeneity of the 
group. Third, there are questions of what 
Rosca winnings are used for. Our theory 
predicts their use for the purchase of 
durable goods. 

808 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
SEPTEMBER 1993 
A number of theoretical issues remain 
outstanding. This paper has compared the 
allocations achieved by random and bidding 
Roscas to the autarkic allocation and to 
each other. It is also interesting to ask how 
the allocations attained by Roscas compare 
with those that are, in principle, feasible for 
the group. For example, are Roscas effi- 
cient? Furthermore, would the group for- 
mation of a credit market result in the same 
allocation as a bidding Rosca? These and 
other questions are pursued in our compan- 
ion paper (Besley et al., 1992). We show 
there that, in general, Roscas do not pro- 
duce efficient allocations and that bidding 
Roscas are inferior to credit markets. 
Nonetheless, the element of chance offered 
by random Roscas is still of value. Indeed, 
we present an example in which an ex post 
efficient market allocation is dominated 
(under the ex ante expected-utility criterion) 
by a random Rosca. 
APPENDIX 
PROOF OF LEMMA: 
It is easy to see that, as long as acquiring 
the durable good is desirable under autarky, 
a unique interior solution to (2) exists. The 
first-order condition for this problem im- 
plies 
V'(a, c*) = [v(1, y)- 
v(a, c*)] /[ y-c*] 
This is the identity claimed in the lemma. 
Since v(a,c) is increasing in a, /ut ) must 
be decreasing. Moreover, since pu( ) is the 
value of a minimand linear in the parameter 
a, elementary duality theory implies that 
ut( ) is a concave function of a. By the 
envelope theorem, 
(a) 
= - Av(c*)[y- 
c*]. 
These relations, the assumed three-times 
continuous differentiability of the utility 
function, and the implicit-function theorem 
establish the extent of differentiability of 
/u(* ) and c*(*) asserted in the lemma. Now 
differentiate v'(a, c*) -,t(a) with respect to 
a, and use the envelope result to get 
dc* 
[ 
Av(c*) 1 
da= - [ V"(ac,C*)][Av'(c*) 
+ 
-* 
>0O 
da 
y-c* 
given concavity of the utility functions 
v(i, *), and the assumption that Auv' ? 0. 
Differentiate the identity v'(a, c*) - ,(a) 
twice with respect to a to get 
d2c 
[II(a*)]l 
da2 
( 
dc* \ 
-v"'(a,c*) 
. 
d)2 
>0 
using the assumptions that Avu"(c*) 
? 0 and 
v"'(i, c*) > 0, for i = 0 and 1. 
COMPLETION OF PROOF OF PROPO- 
SITION 2: 
We need to show that if 1/ v'(0, - ) is 
concave then tb > ta* It is sufficient to show 
that Ca< j(x*) to establish the result. By 
the lemma, the first-order condition for the 
minimization in (10), and the fact that A b < 
,uL(0), we have that 
V'(O, Ca) 
AM(O) > Ib 
= ((-) 
E [v(aji,C^(ai,x*))] 
1 
However, because lXv'(c) ? 0, we have that 
v '(a, c) ? v'(0, c). Therefore, using Jensen's 
inequality and the assumed concavity of 
lv'(O, 
*), 
V'(O, Ca) > (U 
n) 
v(0,c(i, 
x))] 
n 
> v (O, c(x*) 
The result now follows from the fact that 
v"(O, c) < 0. 

VOL. 83 NO. 4 
BESLEYETAL.: ECONOMICS OF ROSCAS 
809 
COMPLETION OF PROOF OF PROPO- 
SITION 3: 
We need to show that lv'= 0 and 
1/ v'(0, * ) convex imply tr > tb. It suffices to 
deduce that cr> c(x*). By the same reason- 
ing as employed in the completion of the 
proof of Proposition 2, the fact that A(a) < 
A b (proved in the text) and the assumption 
that v'(a, c) is independent of a, we have 
V a0g Cr) < ((n)E[ 
o,c(ari, 
x*))]) 
< V' (at, c(x* 
using Jensen's inequality and the convexity 
hypothesis. The result follows at once. 
REFERENCES 
Adams, Dale W. and Canavesi de Sahonero, 
Marie L., "Rotating Savings and Credit 
Associations in Bolivia," Savings and De- 
velopment, 1989, 13 (3), 219-36. 
Anderson, Robert T., "Rotating Credit Asso- 
ciations in India," Economic Development 
and Cultural Change, April 1966, 14, 
334-9. 
Ardener, Shirley, "The Comparative Study of 
Rotating Credit Associations," Journal of 
the Royal Anthropological Institute of 
Great Britain and Ireland, 1964, 94 (2), 
202-29. 
Arnott, Richard and Riley, John, "Asymmetri- 
cal Production Possibilities, the Social 
Gains from Inequality and the Optimum 
Town," Scandinavian Journal of Eco- 
nomics, 1977, 79 (3), 301-11. 
Begashaw, Girma, "The Economic Role of 
Traditional Savings Institutions in Ethio- 
pia," Savings and Development, 1978, 2 
(4), 249-62. 
Bergstrom, Theodore, "Soldiers of Fortune?" 
in Walter P. Heller, Ross M. Starr, and 
David A. Starrett, eds., Equilibrium Anal- 
ysis: Essays in Honor of Kenneth J. Arrow, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1986, pp. 57-80. 
Besley, Timothy J., Coate, Stephen and Loury, 
Glenn, "On the Allocative Performance of 
Rotating 
Savings and Credit Asso- 
ciations," Research Program in Develop- 
ment Studies at Princeton University Dis- 
cussion Paper No. 163, 1992. 
Bonnett, Aubrey W., Institutional Adaptation 
of West Indian Immigrants to America: An 
Analysis of Rotating Credit Associations, 
Washington, DC: University Press of 
America, 1981. 
Bouman, Fritz J. A., "Indigenous Savings and 
Credit Societies in the Third World: A 
Message," 
Savings and Development, 
1977, 1 (4), 181-218. 
Brooke, James, "Informal Capitalism Grows 
in Cameroon," New York Times, 30 
November 1987, p. 30. 
Callier, Philippe, "Informal Finance: The 
Rotating Savings and Credit Association 
-An 
Interpretation," Kyklos, 1990, 43 
(2), 273-6. 
Cope, Thomas and Kurtz, Donald V., "Default 
and the Tanda: A Model Regarding Re- 
cruitment for Rotating Credit Associa- 
tions," Ethnology, April 1980, 18, 213-31. 
Fernando, Edgar, "Informal Credit and Sav- 
ings Organizations in Sri Lanka: The 
Cheetu," Savings and Development, 1986, 
10 (3), 253-63. 
Geertz, Clifford, "The Rotating Credit Asso- 
ciation: A 'Middle Rung' in Develop- 
ment," Economic Development and Cul- 
tural Change, April 1962, 10, 241-63. 
Grossman, Richard, "Deposit 
Insurance, 
Regulation, and Moral Hazard in the 
Thrift Industry: Evidence 
from the 
1930's," American Economic Review, 
September 1992, 82, 800-22. 
Haggblade, Stephen, "Africanization from Be- 
low: The Evolution of Cameroon Savings 
Societies into Western Style Banks," Ru- 
ral Africana, Fall 1978, 2, 35-55. 
Hillman, Arye and Swan, Peter, "Participation 
Rules for Pareto Optimal Clubs," Journal 
of Public Economics, February 1983, 20, 
55-76. 
Kurtz, Donald V., "The Rotating Credit As- 
sociation: An Adaptation to Poverty," 
Human Organization, Spring 1973, 32, 
49-58. 
Light, Ivan, Ethnic Enterprise in America, 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1972. 

810 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
SEPTEMBER 1993 
Mirrlees, James A., "The Optimum Town," 
Scandinavian 
Journal of Economics, 
March 1972, 74, 115-35. 
Norville, Douglass G. and Wehrly, James S., "A 
Rotating Credit Association in the Do- 
minican Republic," Caribbean Studies, 
April 1969, 9, 45-52. 
Osuntogun, 
Adenyi 
and 
Adeyemo, 
Remi, 
"Mobilization of Rural Savings and Credit 
Extension in Pre-Cooperative Organiza- 
tions in South-Western Nigeria," Savings 
and Development, 1981, 5 (4), 247-61. 
Radhakrishnan, S. et al., Chit Funds, Madras, 
India: Institute for Financial Manage- 
ment and Research, 1975. 
Symons, Edwin and White, James, Banking 
Law, 2nd Ed., St. Paul, MN: West Pub- 
lishing, 1984.