American Economic Association
Incorporating Fairness into Game Theory and Economics
Author(s): Matthew Rabin
Source: The American Economic Review, Vol. 83, No. 5 (Dec., 1993), pp. 1281-1302
Published by: American Economic Association
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/2117561
Accessed: 07/12/2010 13:40
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless
you have obtained prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you
may use content in the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/action/showPublisher?publisherCode=aea.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
American Economic Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to The
American Economic Review.
http://www.jstor.org

Incorporating Fairness into Game Theory and Economics 
By MATTHEW RABIN* 
People like to help those who are helping them, and to hurt those who are 
hurting them. Outcomes reflecting such motivations are called fairness equilib- 
ria. Outcomes are mutual-max when each person maximizes the other's material 
payoffs, and mutual-min when each person minimizes the other's payoffs. It is 
shown that every mutual-max or mutual-min Nash equilibrium is a fairness 
equilibrium. If payoffs are small, fairness equilibria are roughly the set of 
mutual-max and mutual-min outcomes; if payoffs are large, fairness equilibria 
are roughly the set of Nash equilibria. Several economic examples are consid- 
ered, and possible welfare implications of fairness are explored. (JEL A12, A13, 
D63, C70) 
Most current economic models assume 
that people pursue only their own material 
self-interest and do not care about "social" 
goals. One exception to self-interest which 
has received some attention by economists 
is simple altruism: people may care not only 
about their own well-being, but also about 
the well-being of others. Yet psychological 
evidence indicates that most altruistic be- 
havior is more complex: people do not seek 
uniformly to help other people; rather, they 
do so according to how generous these other 
people are being. Indeed, the same people 
who are altrustic to other altruistic people 
are also motivated to hurt those who hurt 
them. If somebody is being nice to you, 
fairness dictates that you be nice to him. 
If somebody is being mean to you, fairness 
allows-and 
vindictiveness dictates-that 
you be mean to him. 
Clearly, these emotions have economic 
implications. If an employee has been ex- 
ceptionally loyal, then a manger may feel 
some obligation to treat that employee well, 
even when it is not in his self-interest to do 
so. Other examples of economic behavior 
induced by social goals are voluntary reduc- 
tions of water-use during droughts, conser- 
vation of energy to help solve the energy 
crisis (as documented, for instance, in Ken- 
neth E. Train et al. [1987]), donations to 
public television stations, and many forms 
of voluntary labor. (Burton A. Weisbrod 
[1988] estimates that, in the United States, 
the total value of voluntary labor is $74 
billion annually.) 
On the negative side, a consumer may not 
buy a product sold by a monopolist at an 
"unfair" price, even if the material value to 
the consumer is greater than the price. By 
not buying, the consumer lowers his own 
material well-being so as to punish the 
monopolist. An employee who feels she has 
been mistreated by a firm may engage in 
acts of sabotage. Members of a striking la- 
bor union may strike longer than is in their 
material interests because they want to pun- 
ish a firm for being unfair. 
*Department of Economics, 787 Evans Hall, Uni- 
versity of California, Berkeley, CA 94720. I thank Nikki 
Blasberg, Jeff Ely, April Franco, and especially Gadi 
Barlevy for research assistance; George Akerlof, Colin 
Camerer, Joe Farrell, Jonathan Feinstein, Ruth Given, 
Danny Kahneman, Annette Montgomery, Richard 
Thaler, and especially Bill Dickens for useful conversa- 
tions; and Gadi Barlevy, Roland Benabou, Nikki 
Blasberg, Gary Bolton, Jeff Ely, April Franco, Drew 
Fudenberg, Rachel Kranton, Michael Lii, James Mont- 
gomery, Jim Ratliff, Halsey Rogers, Lones Smith, Jeff 
Zweibel, two anonymous referees, and especially Eddie 
Dekel-Tabak, Jim Fearon, Berkeley's David Levine, 
and Vai-Lam Mui for helpful comments on earlier 
drafts of this paper. I also thank the Institute of 
Business and Economic Research at the University of 
California-Berkeley for their funding of research assis- 
tance and the National Science Foundation (Grant 
SES92-10323) 
for financial support. 
1281 

1282 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
DECEMBER 1993 
By modeling such emotions formally, one 
can begin to understand their economic and 
welfare implications more rigorously and 
more generally. In this paper, I develop a 
game-theoretic framework for incorporating 
such emotions into a broad range of eco- 
nomic models.1 My framework incorporates 
the following three stylized facts: 
(A) People are willing to sacrifice their own 
material well-being to help those who 
are being kind. 
(B) People are willing to sacrifice their own 
material well-being to punish those who 
are being unkind. 
(C) Both motivations (A) and (B) have a 
greater effect on behavior as the mate- 
rial cost of sacrificing becomes smaller. 
In the next section, I briefly present some 
of the evidence from the psychological liter- 
ature regarding these stylized facts. In Sec- 
tion II, I develop a game-theoretic solution 
concept "fairness equilibrium" that incor- 
porates these stylized facts. Fairness equi- 
libria do not in general constitute either a 
subset or a superset of Nash equilibria; that 
is, incorporating fairness considerations can 
both add new predictions to economic mod- 
els and eliminate conventional predictions. 
In Section III, I present some general re- 
sults about which outcomes in economic 
situations are likely to be fairness equilibria. 
The results demonstrate the special role of 
"mutual-max" outcomes (in which, given the 
other person's behavior, each person maxi- 
mizes the other's material payoffs) and 
"mutual-min" outcomes (in which, given the 
other person's behavior, each person mini- 
mizes the other's material payoffs). The fol- 
lowing results hold: 
(i) Any Nash equilibrium that is either a 
mutual-max outcome or mutual-min 
outcome is also a fairness equilibrium. 
(ii) If material payoffs are small, then, 
roughly, an outcome is a fairness equi- 
librium if and only if it is a mutual-max 
or a mutual-min outcome. 
(iii) If material payoffs are large, then, 
roughly, an outcome is a fairness equi- 
librium if and only if it is a Nash equi- 
librium. 
I hope this framework will eventually be 
used to study the implications of fairness in 
different economic situations. While I do 
not develop extended applications in this 
paper, Section IV contains examples illus- 
trating the economic implications of my 
model of fairness. I develop a simple model 
of monopoly pricing and show that fairness 
implies that goods can only be sold at below 
the classical monopoly price. I then explore 
the implications of fairness in an extended 
labor example. 
I consider some welfare implications of 
my model in Section V. Many researchers in 
welfare economics have long considered is- 
sues of fairness to be important in evaluat- 
ing the desirability of different economic 
outcomes. Yet while such policy analysis 
incorporates economists' judgments of fair- 
ness and equity, it often ignores the con- 
cerns for fairness and equity of the eco- 
nomic actors being studied. By considering 
how people's attitudes toward fairness in- 
fluence their behavior and well-being, my 
framework can help incorporate such con- 
cerns more directly into policy analysis and 
welfare economics. 
While my model suggests that the behav- 
ioral implications of fairness are greatest 
when the material consequences of an eco- 
nomic interaction are not too large, there 
'While many recognize the importance of social 
motivations in economic phenomena, these emotions 
have not been investigated widely within the formal 
apparatus of mainstream economics. Other researchers 
who have done so include George Akerlof (1982), 
Peter H. Huang and Ho-Mou Wu (1992), Vai-Lam Mui 
(1992), and Julio J. Rotemberg (1992); but these and 
other economic models have tended to be context- 
specific. While the current version of my model only 
applies to two-person complete-information games, it 
applies to all such games. If it is extended naturally, it 
will therefore have specific consequences in any eco- 
nomic or social situation that can be modeled by non- 
cooperative game theory. (By its generality, my model 
may also contribute to psychological research. While 
some psychology researchers have tried to formulate 
general principles of behavior, I believe that noncoop- 
erative game theory provides a useful language for 
doing so more carefully. My model, for instance, helps 
demonstrate that some seemingly different behaviors in 
different contexts are explicable by common underlying 
principles.) 

VOL. 83 NO. 5 
RABIN: INCORPORATING FAIRNESS INTO GAME THEORY 
1283 
are several reasons why this does not imply 
that the economic implications of fairness 
are minor. First, while it is true that fairness 
influences behavior most when material 
stakes are small, it is not clear that it makes 
little difference when material stakes are 
large. Little empirical research on the eco- 
nomic implications of fairness has been con- 
ducted, and much anecdotal evidence sug- 
gests that people 
sacrifice substantial 
amounts of money to reward or punish kind 
or unkind behavior. Second, many major 
economic institutions, most notably decen- 
tralized markets, are best described as accu- 
mulations of minor economic interactions, 
so that the aggregate implications of depar- 
tures from standard theory in these cases 
may be substantial. Third, the fairness com- 
ponent of a person's overall well-being can 
be influenced substantially by even small 
material changes. 
Finally, even if material incentives in a 
situation are so large as to dominate behav- 
ior, fairness still matters. Welfare eco- 
nomics should be concerned not only with 
the efficient allocation of material goods, 
but also with designing institutions such that 
people are happy about the way they inter- 
act with others. For instance, if a person 
leaves an exchange in which he was treated 
unkindly, then his unhappiness at being so 
treated should be a consideration in evalu- 
ating the efficiency of that exchange. Armed 
with well-founded psychological assump- 
tions, economists can start to address the 
nonmaterial benefits and costs of the free 
market and other institutions.2 
I conclude the paper in Section VI with a 
discussion of some of the shortfalls of my 
model and an outline of possible extensions. 
I. Fairness in Games: Some Evidence 
In this section, I discuss some psychologi- 
cal research that demonstrates the stylized 
facts outlined in the Introduction. Consider 
fact A: "People are willing to sacrifice their 
own material well-being to help those who 
are being kind." The attempt to provide 
public goods without coercion is an arche- 
typical example in which departures from 
pure self-interest can be beneficial to soci- 
ety, and it has been studied by psychologists 
as a means of testing for the existence of 
altruism and cooperation. Laboratory exper- 
iments of public goods have been conducted 
by, among others, John M. Orbell (1978), 
Gerald Marwell and Ruth Ames (1981), 
Werner Guth (1982), Alphons J. C. van de 
Kragt et al. (1983), R. Mark Isaac et al. 
(1984, 1985), Oliver Kim and Mark Walker 
(1984), James Andreoni (1988a, b), and Isaac 
James Walker (1988a, b). These experiments 
typically involve subjects choosing how much 
to contribute toward a public good, where 
the self-interested contribution is small or 
zero. The evidence from these experiments 
is that people cooperate to a degree greater 
than would be implied by pure self-interest. 
Many of these experiments are surveyed in 
Robyn M. Dawes and Richard H. Thaler 
(1988), who conclude that, for most experi- 
ments of one-shot public-good decisions in 
which the individually optimal contribution 
is close to 0 percent, the contribution rate 
ranges between 40 percent and 60 percent 
of the socially optimal level.3 
These experiments indicate that contribu- 
tions toward public goods are not, however, 
the result of "pure altruism," where people 
seek unconditionally to help others. Rather, 
the willingness to help seems highly contin- 
gent on the behavior of others. If people do 
not think that others are doing their fair 
share, then their enthusiasm for sacrificing 
for others is greatly diminished. 
2Indeed, I show in Section V that there exist situa- 
tions in which the unique fairness equilibrium leaves 
both players feeling that they have been treated un- 
kindly. This means that negative emotions may be 
endogenously generated by particular economic struc- 
tures. I also state and prove an unhappy theorem: 
every game contains at least one such "unkind equilib- 
rium." That is, there does not exist any situation in 
which players necessarily depart with positive feelings. 
3Further examples of stylized fact A can be found in 
Richard E. Goranson and Leonard Berkowitz (1966), 
Martin Greenberg and David Frisch (1972), Elizabeth 
Hoffman and Matthew Spitzer (1982), and Daniel Kah- 
neman et al. (1986a,b). 

1284 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
DECEMBER 1993 
Indeed, stylized fact B says that people 
will in some situations not only refuse to 
help others, but will sacrifice to hurt others 
who are being unfair. This idea has been 
most widely explored in the "ultimatum 
game," discussed at length in Thaler (1988). 
The ultimatum game consists of two people 
splitting some fixed amount of money X 
according to the following rules: a "pro- 
poser" offers some division of X to a "de- 
cider." If the decider says yes, they split the 
money according to the proposal. If the 
decider says no, they both get no money. 
The result of pure self-interest is clear: pro- 
posers will never offer more than a penny, 
and deciders should accept any offer of at 
least a penny. Yet experiments clearly reject 
such behavior. Data show that, even in one- 
shot settings, deciders are willing to punish 
unfair offers by rejecting them, and pro- 
posers tend to make fair offers.4 Some pa- 
pers illustrating stylized fact B are Goran- 
son and Berkowitz (1966), Jerald Greenberg 
(1978), Guth et al. (1982), Kahneman et al. 
(1986a,b), and Alvin E. Roth et al. (1991). 
Stylized fact C says that people will not 
be as willing to sacrifice a great amount of 
money to maintain fairness as they would be 
with small amounts of money. It is tested 
and partially confirmed in Gerald Leventhal 
and David Anderson (1970), but its validity 
is intuitive to most people. If the ultimatum 
game were conducted with $1, then most 
deciders would reject a proposed split of 
($0.90, $0.10). If the ultimatum game were 
conducted with $10 million, the vast major- 
ity of deciders would accept a proposed 
split of ($9 million, $1 million).5 Consider 
also the following example from Dawes and 
Thaler (1988 p. 145): 
In the rural areas around Ithaca it is 
common for farmers to put some fresh 
produce on a table by the road. There 
is a cash box on the table, and cus- 
tomers are expected to put money in 
the box in return for the vegetables 
they take. The box has just a small slit, 
so money can only be put in, not taken 
out. Also, the box is attached to the 
table, so no one can (easily) make off 
with the money. We think that the 
farmers who use this system have just 
about the right model of human na- 
ture. They feel that enough people 
will volunteer to pay for the fresh corn 
to make it worthwhile to put it out 
there. The farmers also know that if it 
were easy enough to take the money, 
someone would do so. 
This example is in the spirit of stylized fact 
C: people succumb to the temptation to 
pursue their interests at the expense of oth- 
ers in proportion to the profitability of do- 
ing so. 
From an economist's point of view, it 
matters not only whether stylized facts A-C 
are true, but whether they have important 
economic implications. Kahneman et al. 
(1986a, b) present strong arguments that 
these general issues are indeed important. 
For anyone unconvinced of the importance 
of social goals empirically or intuitively, one 
purpose of this paper is to help test the 
proposition theoretically: will adding fair- 
ness to economic models substantially alter 
conclusions? If so, in what situations will 
conclusions be altered, and in what way? 
II. A Model 
To formalize fairness, I adopt the frame- 
work developed by John Geanakoplos, 
David Pearce, and Ennio Stacchetti (1989) 
(hereafter, GPS). They modify conventional 
game theory by allowing payoffs to depend 
on players' beliefs as well as on their actions 
(see also Itzhak Gilboa and David Schmei- 
dler, 1988).6 While explicitly incorporating 
4The decision by proposers to make fair offers can 
come from at least two motivations: self-interested 
proposers might be fair because they know unfair of- 
fers may be rejected, and proposers themselves have a 
preference for being fair. 
5Clearly, however, a higher percentage of deciders 
would turn down an offer of ($9,999,999.90, $0.10) than 
turn down ($0.90, $0.10). In his footnote 6, Thaler 
(1988) concurs with these intuitions, while pointing out 
the obvious difficulty in financing experiments of the 
scale needed to test them fully. 
6Outside the context of noncooperative game the- 
ory, Akerlof and William T. Dickens (1982) presented 
an earlier model incorporating beliefs directly into 
people's utility functions. 

VOL. 83 NO. 5 
RABIN: INCORPORATING FAIRNESS INTO GAME THEORY 
1285 
Player 
2 
Opera 
Boxing 
Opera 
2X,X 
0,0 
Player 
1 
Boxing 
0,0 
X,2X 
FIGURE 1. EXAMPLE 1: BATTLE OF THE SEXES 
beliefs substantially complicates analysis, I 
argue that the approach is necessary to cap- 
ture aspects of fairness. Fortunately, GPS 
show that many standard techniques and 
results have useful analogues in these "psy- 
chological games." 
In developing my model of fairness, I 
extend the GPS approach with an addi- 
tional step which I believe will prove essen- 
tial for incorporating psychology into eco- 
nomic research: I derive psychological games 
from basic "material games." Whereas GPS 
provide a technique for analyzing games 
that already incorporate emotions, I use 
assumptions about fairness to derive psy- 
chological games from the more traditional 
material description of a situation. Doing 
so, I develop a model that can be applied 
generally and can be compared directly to 
standard economic analysis. 
To motivate both the general framework 
and my specific model, consider Example 1 
(see Fig. 1), where X is a positive number. 
(Throughout the paper, I shall represent 
games with the positive "scale variable" X. 
This allows me to consider the effects of 
increasing or decreasing a game's stakes 
without changing its fundamental strategic 
structure.) This is a standard battle-of-the- 
sexes game: two people prefer to go to the 
same event together, but each prefers a 
different event. Formally, both players pre- 
fer to play either (opera, opera) or (boxing, 
boxing) rather than not coordinating; but 
player 1 prefers (opera, opera), and player 2 
prefers (boxing, boxing). 
The payoffs are a function only of the 
moves made by the players. Suppose, how- 
ever, that player 1 (say) cares not only about 
his own payoff, but depending on player 2's 
motives, he cares also about player 2's pay- 
off. In particular, if player 2 seems to be 
intentionally helping player 1, then player 1 
will be motivated to help player 2; if player 
2 seems to be intentionally hurting player 1, 
then player 1 will wish to hurt player 2. 
Suppose player 1 believes (a) that player 
2 is playing boxing, and (b) that player 2 
believes player 1 is playing boxing. Then 
player 1 concludes that player 2 is choosing 
an action that helps both players (playing 
opera would hurt both players). Because 
player 2 is not being either generous or 
mean, neither stylized fact A nor B applies. 
Thus, player 1 will be neutral about his 
effect on player 2 and will pursue his mate- 
rial self-interest by playing boxing. If this 
argument is repeated for player 2, one can 
show that, in the natural sense, (boxing, 
boxing) is an equilibrium: if it is common 
knowledge that this will be the outcome, 
then each player is maximizing his utility by 
playing his strategy. 
Of course, (boxing, boxing) is a conven- 
tional Nash equilibrium in this game. To see 
the importance of fairness, suppose player 1 
believes (a) that player 2 will play boxing, 
and (b) that player 2 believes that player 1 is 
playing opera. Now player 1 concludes that 
player 2 is lowering her own payoff in order 
to hurt him. Player 1 will therefore feel 
hostility toward player 2 and will wish to 
harm her. If this hostility is strong enough, 
player 1 may be willing to sacrifice his own 
material well-being, and play opera rather 
than boxing. Indeed, if both players have a 
strong enough emotional reaction to each 
other's behavior, then (opera, boxing) is an 
equilibrium. If it is common knowledge that 
they are playing this outcome, then, in the 
induced atmosphere of hostility, both play- 
ers will wish to stick with it. 
Notice the central role of expectations: 
player l's payoffs do not depend simply on 
the actions taken, but also on his beliefs 
about player 2's motives. Could these emo- 
tions be directly modeled by transforming 
the payoffs, so that one could analyze this 
transformed game in the conventional way? 
This turns out to be impossible. In the natu- 
ral sense, both of the equilibria discussed 
above are strict: each player strictly prefers 
to play his strategy given the equilibrium. In 
the equilibrium (boxing, boxing), player 1 

1286 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
DECEMBER 1993 
strictly prefers playing boxing to opera. In 
the equilibrium (opera, boxing) player 1 
strictly prefers opera to boxing. No matter 
what payoffs are chosen, these statements 
would be contradictory if payoffs depended 
solely on the actions taken. To formalize 
these preferences, therefore, it is necessary 
to develop a model that explicitly incorpo- 
rates beli-efs.7 I now construct such a model, 
applicable to all two-person, finite-strategy 
games. 
Consider a two-player, normal form game 
with (mixed) strategy sets S1 and S2 for 
players 1 and 2, derived from finite pure- 
strategy sets A1 and A2. Let vi: SI x S2 -l- 
be player i's material payoffs.8 
From this "material game," I now con- 
struct a "psychological game" as defined in 
GPS. I assume that each player's subjective 
expected utility when he chooses his strat- 
egy will depend on three factors: (i) his 
strategy, (ii) his beliefs about the other 
player's strategy choice, and (iii) his beliefs 
about the other player's beliefs about his 
strategy. Throughout, I shall use the follow- 
ing notation: a1 E SI and a2 E S2 represent 
the strategies chosen by the two players; 
b, E S, and b2 E S2 represent, respectively, 
player 2's beliefs about what strategy player 
1 is choosing, and player l's beliefs about 
what strategy player 2 is choosing; c1 E S1 
and c2 eS2 
represent player l's beliefs 
about what player 2 believes player l's strat- 
egy is, and player 2's beliefs about what 
player 1 believes player 2's strategy is. 
The first step to incorporating fairness 
into the analysis is to define a "kindness 
function," fM(ai, b1), which measures how 
kind player i is being to player j. (I assume 
in this paper that players have a shared 
notion of kindness and fairness and that 
they apply these standards symmetrically. In 
Rabin (1992), I show that most of the re- 
sults of this paper hold if multiple kindness 
functions are allowed.) 
If player i believes that player j is choos- 
ing strategy b1., how kind is player i being by 
choosing ai? Player i is choosing the payoff 
pair (7ri(ai, bj), i1j(bj, at)) from among the 
set of all payoffs feasible if player j is choos- 
ing strategy b1 [i.e., from among the set 
fl(bj) 
{(wi(a, bj), wj(bj, a)) a E Si}]. The 
players might have a variety of notions of 
how kind player i is being by choosing any 
given point in 11(bj). While I shall now 
proceed with a specific (and purposely sim- 
plistic) measure of kindness, I show in the 
Appendix that the results of this paper are 
valid for any kindness function that specifies 
the equitable payoffs as some rule for shar- 
ing along the Pareto frontier. 
Let rjh(bj) be player j's highest payoff in 
fl(bi), and let '-f(b1) be player j's lowest 
payoff among points that are Pareto-efficient 
in H(b1). Let the "equitable payoff" be 
7je(bj) = [7rjL(b) + 7ri(bj)]/2. 
When the 
Pareto frontier is linear, this payoff literally 
corresponds to the payoff player j would get 
if player i "splits the difference" with her 
among Pareto-efficient points. More gener- 
ally, it provides a crude reference point 
against which to measure how generous 
player i is being to player j. Finally, let 
7wmin(bj) be the worst possible payoff for 
player j in the set fl(bj). 
From these payoffs, I define the kindness 
function. This function captures how much 
more than or less than player j's equit- 
able payoff player i believes he is giving to 
player j. 
Definition 1: Player i's kindness to player j 
is given by 
fi (aj ,bj) =_ 7Tj(bj,ai) 
- 
j( bJ) 
Ir 
)(bj), 
ah) 
- 
i(bj) 
I f 
bi.p( 1).min 
(b1) =O, then fi(ai, bj) =0. 
7My point here is that the results I get could not be 
gotten simply by respecifying the payoffs over the phys- 
ical actions in the game. Van Kolpin (1993) argues that 
one can apply conventional game theory to these games 
by including the choice of beliefs as additional parts of 
plavers' strategies. 
I shall emphasize pure strategies in this paper, 
though formal definitions allow for mixed strategies, 
and all stated results apply to them. One reason I 
de-emphasize mixed strategies is that the characteriza- 
tion of preferences over mixed strategies is not 
straightforward. In psychological games, there can be a 
difference between interpreting mixed strategies liter- 
ally as purposeful mixing by a player versus interpret- 
ing them as uncertainty by other players. Such issues of 
interpretation are less important in conventional game 
theory, and consequently incorporating mixed strate- 
gies is more straightforward. 

VOL. 83 NO. 5 
RABIN: INCORPORATING FAIRNESS INTO GAME THEORY 
1287 
Note that f, = 0 if and only if player i is 
trying to give player j her equitable payoff.9 
If fi < 0, player i is giving player j less than 
her equitable payoff. Recalling the defini- 
tion of the equitable payoff, there are two 
general ways for fi to be negative: either 
player i is grabbing more than his share on 
the Pareto frontier of H1(b) or he is choos- 
ing an inefficient point in H(b1). Finally, 
fi > 0 if player i is giving player j more than 
her equitable payoff. Recall that this can 
happen only if the Pareto frontier of H(bj) 
is a nonsingleton; otherwise 7rr = 7Jh 
I shall let the function fj(bj, ci) represent 
player i's beliefs about how kindly player j 
is treating him. While I shall keep the two 
notationally distinct, this function is for- 
mally equivalent to the function fj(aj, bi). 
Definition 2: Player i's belief about how kind 
player j is being to him is given by 
- 
ri(ci, bj) )-_iT(Cj) 
f j ( bj,~ ci ) 
7 
)=_#7 
min 
If ri C 
i 
(Ci) = O, then fj(bj, cj) = 0. 
Because the kindness functions are nor- 
malized, the values of fif() and fj(*) must 
lie in the interval [- 1,2] Further, the kind- 
ness functions are insensitive to positive 
affine transformations of the material pay- 
offs (overall utility, as defined shortly, will 
be sensitive to such transformations). 
These kindness functions can now be used 
to specify fully the players' preferences. 
Each player i chooses ai to maximize his 
expected utility Ui(ai, bj, ci), which incorpo- 
rates both his material utility and the play- 
ers' shared notion of fairness: 
Ui(ai bj, ci) 
= ri(ai, bj) + fj(bj, ci) [1 + fi(ai, bj)] . 
The central behavioral feature of these 
preferences reflects the original discussion. 
If player i believes that player j is treating 
him badly- fj() < 0-then 
player i wishes 
to treat player j badly, by choosing an ac- 
tion ai such that fif() is low or negative. If 
player j is treating player i kindly, then 
fj( ) will be positive, and player i will wish 
to treat player j kindly. Of course, the spec- 
ified utility function is such that players will 
trade off their preference for fairness against 
their material well-being, and material pur- 
suits may override concerns for fairness. 
Because 
the kindness 
functions 
are 
bounded above and below, this utility func- 
tion reflects stylized fact C: the bigger the 
material payoffs, the less the players' behav- 
ior reflects their concern for fairness. Thus, 
the behavior in these games is sensitive to 
the scale of material payoffs. Obviously, I 
have not precisely determined the relative 
power of fairness versus material interest or 
even given units for the material payoffs; my 
results in specific examples are, therefore, 
only qualitative. 
Notice that the preferences Vi(ai, bj, ci) 
rri(ai, bj) + fj(bj, ci) . fi(ai, bj) would yield 
precisely the same behavior as the utility 
function Ui(ai, bj, ci). I have made the pref- 
erences slightly more complicated so as to 
capture one bit of realism: whenever player 
j is treating player i unkindly, player i's 
overall utility will be lower than his material 
payoffs. That is, fj() < 0 implies Ui() < 
7ri ). If a person is treated badly, he leaves 
the situation bitter, and his ability to take 
revenge only partly makes up for the loss in 
welfare. 1 
Because these preferences form a psycho- 
logical game, I can use the concept of psy- 
chological Nash equilibrium defined by GPS; 
this is simply the analog of Nash equilib- 
rium for psychological games, imposing the 
additional condition that all higher-order 
9When 7h 
= 
min, all of player i's responses to b 
yield player j the same payoff. Therefore, there is no 
issue of kindness, and fi = 0. 
'0As Lones Smith has pointed out to me, however, 
this specification has one unrealistic implication: if 
player 1 is being "mean" to player 2 (f1 < 0), then the 
nicer player 2 is to player 1, the happier is player 1, 
even if one ignores the implication for material payoffs. 
While this is perhaps correct if people enjoy making 
suckers of others, it is more likely that a player will feel 
guilty if he is mean to somebody who is nice to him. 

1288 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
DECEMBER 1993 
beliefs match actual behavior. I shall call 
the solution concept thus defined "fairness 
equilibrium." 11 
Definition 3: The pair of strategies (aj,a2) 
E (S1, S2) is a fairness equilibrium if, for 
i=1,2, j*i, 
(1) 
ai E argmaxaEsiUi;(a,bj,ci) 
(2) 
ci=bi=ai. 
Is this solution concept consistent with 
the earlier discussion of Example 1? In par- 
ticular, is the "hostile" outcome (opera, 
boxing) a fairness equilibrium? If c1 = b1 = 
a1 = opera and c2 = b2 = a2 = boxing, then 
player 2 feels hostility, and f2 = - 1. Thus, 
player l's utility from playing U is 0 (with 
fl = -1) and from playing boxing it is X -1 
(with f1 = 0). Thus, if X < 1, player 1 prefers 
opera to boxing given these beliefs. Player 2 
prefers boxing to opera. For X < 1, there- 
fore, (opera, boxing) is an equilibrium. In 
this equilibrium, both players are hostile 
toward each other and unwilling to coordi- 
nate with the other if it means conceding to 
the other player.12 
Because the players will feel no hostility 
if they coordinate, both (opera, opera) and 
(boxing, boxing) are also equilibria for all 
values of X. Again, these are conventional 
outcomes; the interesting implication of 
Player 
2 
Cooperate 
Defect 
Cooperate 
4X,F4X 
,6X 
Player 
1 
Defect 
6X,O 
X,X 
FIGURE 2. EXAMPLE 2: PRISONER'S DILEMMA 
fairness in Example 1 is that the players' 
hostility may lead each to undertake costly 
punishment of the other. The game Pris- 
oner's Dilemma shows, by contrast, that 
fairness may also lead each player to sacri- 
fice to help the other player (see Fig. 2). 
Consider the cooperative outcome, (coop- 
erate, cooperate). If it is common knowl- 
edge to the players that they are playing 
(cooperate, cooperate), then each player 
knows that the other is sacrificing his own 
material well-being in order to help him. 
Each will thus want to help the other by 
playing cooperate, so long as the material 
gains from defecting are not too large. Thus, 
if X is small enough (less than -), (cooper- 
ate, cooperate) is a fairness equilibrium. 
For any value of X, however, the Nash 
equilibrium (defect, defect) is also a fairness 
equilibrium. This is because if it is common 
knowledge that they are playing (defect, de- 
fect), then each player knows that the other 
is not willing to sacrifice X in order to give 
the other 6X. Thus, both players will be 
hostile; in the outcome (defect, defect), each 
player is satisfying both his desire to hurt 
the other and his material self-interest. 
The prisoner's dilemma illustrates two is- 
sues I discussed earlier. First, one cannot 
fully capture realistic behavior by invoking 
"pure altruism." In Example 2, both (coop- 
erate, cooperate) and (defect, defect) are 
fairness equilibria, and I believe this predic- 
tion of the model is in line with reality. 
People sometimes cooperate, but if each 
expects the other player to defect, then they 
both will. Yet, having both of these as equi- 
libria is inconsistent with pure altruism. 
Suppose that player l's concern for player 2 
were independent of player 2's behavior. 
1iGPS prove the existence of an equilibrium in all 
psychological games meeting certain continuity and 
convexity conditions. The kindness function used in the 
text does not yield utility functions that are everywhere 
continuous, so that GPS's theorem does not apply 
(although I have found no counterexamples to exis- 
tence). As I discuss in Appendix A, continuous kind- 
ness functions that are very similar to the one used in 
the text, and for which all general results hold, can 
readily be constructed. Such kindness functions would 
guarantee existence using the GPS theorem. 
12For X < 1, (boxing, opera) is also an equilibrium. 
In this equilibrium, both players are with common 
knowledge "conceding," and both players feel hostile 
toward each other because both are giving up their 
best possible payoff in order to hurt the other player. 
The fact that, for 
X < 1, (opera, boxing) is an 
equilibrium, but (boxing, opera) is not, might suggest 
that (opera, boxing) is "more likely." 

VOL. 83 NO. 5 
RABIN: INCORPORATING FAIRNESS INTO GAME THEORY 
1289 
Then if he thought that player 2 was playing 
cooperate, he would play cooperate if and 
only if he were willing to give up 2X in 
order to help player 2 by 4X; if player 1 
thought that player 2 was playing defect, 
then he would play cooperate if and only if 
he were willing to give up X in order to 
help player 2 by 5X. Clearly, then, if player 
1 plays cooperate in response to cooperate, 
he would play cooperate in response to de- 
fect. In order to get the two equilibria, 
player 1 must care differentially about help- 
ing (or hurting) player 2 as a function of 
player 2's behavior.13 
The second issue that the prisoner's 
dilemma illustrates is the role of intention- 
ality in attitudes about fairness. Psychologi- 
cal evidence indicates that people deter- 
mine the fairness of others according to 
their motives, not solely according to ac- 
tions taken.14 In game-theoretic terms, 
"motives" can be inferred from a player's 
choice of strategy from among those choices 
he has, so what strategy a player could have 
chosen (but did not) can be as important as 
what strategy he actually chooses. For ex- 
ample, people differentiate between those 
who take a generous action by choice and 
those who are forced to do so. Consider 
Example 3, depicted in Figure 3. 
This is the "prisoner's dilemma" in which 
player 2 is forced to cooperate. It corre- 
sponds, for instance, to a case in which 
someone is forced to contribute to a public 
good. In this degenerate game, player 1 will 
always defect, so the unique fairness equi- 
librium is (defect, cooperate). This contrasts 
to the possibility of the (cooperate, cooper- 
ate) equilibrium in the prisoner's dilemma. 
The difference is that now player 1 will feel 
no positive regard for player 2's "decision" 
to cooperate, because player 2 is not volun- 
Player 
2 
C 
C 
4X,74X 
Player 
1 
D 6X,L 
FIGURE 3. EXAMPLE 3: PRISONER'S NON-DILEMMA 
Player 
2 
Dare 
Chicken 
Dare 
-2X,-2X 
2X,O 
Player 
1 
Chicken 
0,2X 
X,X 
FIGURE 4. EXAMPLE 4: CHICKEN 
tarily doing player 1 any favors; you are not 
grateful to somebody who is simply doing 
what he must.15 
In both Examples 1 and 2, adding fairness 
creates new equilibria but does not get rid 
of any (strict), Nash equilibria. Example 4, 
the game "Chicken" 16 illustrates that fair- 
ness can rule out strict Nash equilibria (see 
Fig. 4). 
This game is widely studied by political 
scientists, because it captures well situations 
in which nations challenge each other. Each 
country hopes to "dare" while the other 
country backs down [outcomes 
(dare, 
chicken) and (chicken, dare)]; but both 
dread most of all the outcome (dare, dare), 
in which neither nation backs down. 
130f course, I am ruling out "income effects" and 
the like as explanations; but that is clearly not what 
causes the multiplicity of equilibria in public-goods 
experiments. 
14Greenberg and Frisch (1972) and Goranson and 
Berkowitz (1966) find evidence for this proposition, 
though not in as extreme a form as implied by my 
model. 
15Player l's complete indifference to player 2's plight 
here is because I have excluded any degree of pure 
altruism from my model. Indeed, many of the strong 
results throughout the paper are because I am ruling 
out ure altruism. 
While I will stick to the conventional name for 
this game, I note that it is extremely speciesist-there 
is little evidence that chickens are less brave than 
humans and other animals. 

1290 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
DECEMBER 1993 
Consider the Nash equilibrium (dare, 
chicken), where player 1 "dares" and player 
2 "chickens out." Is it a fairness equilib- 
rium? In this outcome, it is common knowl- 
edge that player 1 is hurting player 2 to help 
himself. If X is small enough, player 2 
would therefore deviate by playing dare, 
thus hurting both player 1 and himself. Thus, 
for small X, (dare, chicken) is not a fairness 
equilibrium; nor, obviously, is (chicken, 
dare). Both Nash equilibria are, for small 
enough X, inconsistent with fairness. 
Whereas fairness does not rule out Nash 
equilibrium in Examples 1 and 2, it does so 
in Example 4. The next section presents 
several propositions about fairness equilib- 
rium, including one pertaining to why fair- 
ness rules out Nash equilibria in Chicken, 
but not in Prisoner's Dilemma or Battle of 
the Sexes. 
III. Some General Propositions 
In the pure-strategy Nash equilibria of 
Battle of the Sexes, each taking the other 
player's strategy as given, each player is 
maximizing the other player's payoff by 
maximizing his own payoffs. Thus, each 
player can satisfy his own material interests 
without violating his sense of fairness. In 
the Nash equilibrium of Prisoner's Dilemma, 
each player is minimizing the other player's 
payoff by maximizing his own. Thus, bad 
will is generated, and "fairness" means that 
each player will try to hurt the other. Once 
again, players simultaneously satisfy their 
own material interests and their notions of 
fairness. 
These two types of outcomes-where 
players mutually maximize each other's ma- 
terial payoffs, and where they mutually min- 
imize each other's material payoffs-will 
play an important role in many of the re- 
sults of this paper, so I define them for- 
mally: 
Definition 4: A strategy pair (a1, a2) E 
(S1 S2) is a mutual-max outcome if, for i= 
1,2, jii, 
aieargmaxaE Si7j(a, a). 
Definition 5: A strategy pair (a1, a2) E 
(SP S2) is a mutual-min outcome if, for i= 
1,2, j 
i, ai E argminaeSi 7j(a, a1). 
The following definitions will also prove 
useful. Each of these definitions character- 
izes an outcome of a game in terms of the 
value of "kindness" fi induced by each of 
the players. 
Definition 6: (a) An outcome is strictly posi- 
tive if, for i = 1,2, fi > 0. (b) An outcome is 
weakly positive if, for i = 1, 2, fi 2 0. (c) An 
outcome is strictly negative if, for i = 1,2, 
fi < 0. (d) An outcome is weakly negative if, 
for i = 1, 2, fi < 0. (e) An outcome is neutral 
if, for i = 1,2, fi = 0. (f) An outcome is 
mixed if, for i=1,2, 
j#i, 
fifi<0. 
Using these definitions, I state a proposi- 
tion about two types of Nash equilibria that 
will necessarily also be fairness equilibria 
(all proofs are in Appendix B). 
PROPOSITION 1: Suppose that (a1, a2) is 
a Nash equilibrium, and either a mutual-max 
outcome or a mutual-min outcome. Then 
(a1, a2) is a fairness equilibrium. 
Note that the pure-strategy Nash equilib- 
ria in Chicken do not satisfy either premise 
of Proposition 1. In each, one player is 
maximizing the other's payoff, while the 
other is minimizing the first's payoff. If X is 
small enough, so that emotions dominate 
material payoffs, then the player who is 
being hurt will choose to hurt the other 
player, even when this action is self-destruc- 
tive, and will play dare rather than chicken. 
While Proposition 1 characterizes Nash 
equilibria that are necessarily fairness equi- 
libria, Proposition 2 characterizes which 
outcomes-Nash 
or non-Nash-can 
possi- 
bly be fairness equilibria. 
PROPOSITION 2: Every fairness equilib- 
rium outcome is either strictly positive or 
weakly negative. 
Proposition 2 shows that there will always 
be a certain symmetry of attitude in any 
fairness equilibrium. It will never be the 
case that, in equilibrium, one person is kind 
while the other is unkind. 
While Propositions 1 and 2 pertain to all 
games, irrespective of the scale of material 
payoffs, I present in the remainder of this 

VOL. 83 NO. 5 
RABIN. INCORPORATING FAIRNESS INTO GAME THEORY 
1291 
section several results that hold when mate- 
rial payoffs are either arbitrarily large or 
arbitrarily small. To do so, I will consider 
classes of games that differ only in the scale 
of the material payoffs. Given the set of 
strategies S1 X S2 and the payoff functions 
(-1(a1, a2), n-2(a1, a2)), let W be the set of 
games with strategies Si X S2 and, for all 
X > 0, material payoffs 
(X 
71(al, a2), X 
n72(al, 
a2)). 
Let G(X)e -' 
be the game corresponding 
to a given value of X. 
Consider Chicken again. It can be verified 
that, if X is small enough, then both (dare, 
dare) and (chicken, chicken) are fairness 
equilibria. Note that, while these two out- 
comes are (respectively) mutual-min and 
mutual-max outcomes, they are not Nash 
equilibria. Yet, when X is small, the fact 
that they are not equilibria in the "material" 
game is unimportant, because fairness con- 
siderations will start to dominate. Propo- 
sition 3 shows that the class of "strict" 
mutual-max and mutual-min outcomes are 
fairness equilibria for X small enough. 
PROPOSITION 
3: For any outcome 
(a1, a2) that is either a strictly positive mu- 
tual-max outcome or a strictly negative 
mutual-min outcome, there exists an X such 
that, for all X E (0, X), (a1, a2) 
is a fairness 
equilibrium in G(X). 
While Proposition 3 gives sufficient condi- 
tions for outcomes to be fairness equilibria 
when material payoffs are small, Proposi- 
tion 4 gives conditions for which outcomes 
will not be fairness equilibria when material 
payoffs are small. 
PROPOSITION 4: Suppose that (a1, a2)e 
(S1,S2) 
is not a mutual-max income, nor a 
mutual-min outcome, nor a Nash equilibrium 
in which either player is unable to lower the 
payoffs of the other player. Then there exists 
an X such that, for all X E (0, X), (al, a2) is 
not a fairness equilibrium in G(X). 
Together, Propositions 3 and 4 state that, 
for games with very small material payoffs, 
finding the fairness equilibria consists ap- 
proximately of finding the Nash equilibria in 
each of the following two hypothetical 
games: (i) the game in which each player 
tries to maximize the other player's material 
payoffs and (ii) the game in which each 
player tries to minimize the other player's 
material payoffs. 
There are two caveats to this being a 
general characterization of the set of fair- 
ness equilibria in low-payoff games. First, 
Proposition 3 does not necessarily hold for 
mutual-max or mutual-min outcomes in 
which players are giving each other the eq- 
uitable payoffs (i.e., when the outcomes are 
neutral). Thus, "non-strict" mutual-max and 
mutual-min outcomes need to be double- 
checked. Second, it is also necessary to 
check whether certain types of Nash equi- 
libria in the original game are also fairness 
equilibria, even though they are neither mu- 
tual-max nor mutual-min outcomes. The po- 
tentially problematic Nash equilibria are 
those in which one of the players has no 
options that will lower the other's material 
payoffs. 
I now turn to the case in which material 
payoffs are very large. Proposition 5 states 
essentially that as material payoffs become 
large, the players' behavior is dominated by 
material self-interest. In particular, players 
will play only Nash equilibria if the scale of 
payoffs is large enough. 
PROPOSITION 5: If (al, a2) 
is a strict 
Nash equilibrium for games in W, then there 
exists an X such that, for all X > X, (al, a2) 
is a fairness equilibrium in G(X).17 If (al, a2) 
is not a Nash equilibrium for games in W, 
then there exists an Xsuch that, for all X> X, 
(al, a2) is not a fairness equilibrium in G(X). 
The only caveat to the set of Nash equi- 
libria being equivalent to the set of fairness 
equilibria when payoffs are large is that 
17 
17A Nash equilibrium is strict if each player is choos- 
ing his unique optimal strategy. Mixed-strategy Nash 
equilibria are, for instance, never strict, because they 
involve the players being indifferent among two or 
more actions. 

1292 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
DECEMBER 1993 
some non-strict Nash equilibria are not fair- 
ness equilibria. 
IV. Two Applications 
One context in which fairness has been 
studied is monopoly pricing (see e.g., Thaler, 
1985; Kahneman et al., 1986a,b). Might 
consumers 
see 
conventional 
monopoly 
prices as unfair and refuse to buy at such 
prices even when worth it in material terms? 
If this is the case, then even a profit-maxi- 
mizing monopolist would price below the 
level predicted by standard economic the- 
ory. I now present a game-theoretic model 
of a monopoly and show that this intuition 
is an implication of fairness equilibrium. 
I assume that a monopolist has costs c 
per unit of production, and a consumer 
values the product at v. These are common 
knowledge. The monopolist picks a price 
p E [c, v] as the consumer simultaneously 
picks a "reservation" price r E [c, v], above 
which he is not willing to pay. If p < r, then 
the good is sold at price p, and the payoffs 
are p - c for the monopolist and v - p for 
the consumer. If p> r, then there is no 
sale, and the payoffs are 0 for each player. 
Though this is formally an infinite-strategy 
game, it can be analyzed using my model of 
fairness.18 Applying Nash equilibrium allows 
any outcome. We might, however, further 
narrow our prediction, because the strategy 
r = v for the consumer weakly dominates all 
other strategies (this would also be the re- 
sult of subgame perfection if this were a 
sequential game, with the monopolist set- 
ting the price first). Thus, if players cared 
only about material payoffs, a reasonable 
outcome in this game is the equilibrium 
where p = r = v, so that the monopolist ex- 
tracts all the surplus from trade. 
What is the highest price consistent with 
a fairness equilibrium at which this product 
could be sold? First, what is the function 
fc(r, p), how fair the consumer is being to 
the monopolist? Given that the monopolist 
sets p, the only question is whether the 
monopolist gets profits p - c or profits 0. If 
r 2 p, then the consumer is maximizing both 
the monopolist's and his own payoffs, so 
fc(r, p) = 0. If r < p, then the consumer is 
minimizing the monopolist's payoffs, so 
fc(r, p) = - 1. One implication of this is that 
the monopolist will always exploit its posi- 
tion, because it will never feel positively 
toward the consumer; thus, r > p cannot be 
a fairness equilibrium. 
Because r < p leads to no trade, this 
means that the only possibility for an equi- 
librium with trade is when p = r. How fair 
is the monopolist being to the consumer 
when p = r = z? Calculations show that 
fM(z,z)=[c-z]/2[v-c]. 
Because I am 
considering only values of z between c and 
v, this number is negative. Any time the 
monopolist is not setting a price equal to its 
costs, 
the 
consumer 
thinks 
that 
the 
monopolist is being unfair. This is because 
the monopolist is choosing the price that 
extracts as much surplus as possible from 
the consumer, given the consumer's refusal 
to buy at a price higher than z. 
To see whether p = r = z is a fairness 
equilibrium for a given z, one must see 
whether the consumer would wish to devi- 
ate by setting r < z, thus eliminating the 
monopolist's profits. The consumer's total 
utility from r < z is 
UC=O+fM(Z,z) 
[1+ -1] =0. 
The consumer's total utility from sticking 
with strategy r = z is 
UC = V-z 
+ fM(Z, Z) [1 +0] 
= v - z + [c - z]/2[v 
- c]. 
Calculations show that the highest price 
consistent with fairness equilibrium is given 
18Note, however, that I have artificially limited the 
strategy spaces of the players, requiring them to make 
only mutually beneficial offers; there are problems with 
the definitions of this paper if the payoff space of a 
game is unbounded. Moreover, though I believe that 
all results would be qualitatively similar with more 
realistic models, the exact answers provided here are 
sensitive to the specification of the strategy space. 

VOL. 83 NO. 5 
RABIN: INCORPORATING FAIRNESS INTO GAME THEORY 
1293 
by 
z* = [2v2-2cu 
+ c]/[1 + 2v-2c]. 
This number is strictly less than v when 
v > c. Thus, the highest equilibrium price 
possible is lower than the conventional 
monopoly price when fairness is added to 
the equation. This reflects the arguments of 
Kahneman et al. (1986a, b): a monopolist 
interested in maximizing profits ought not 
to set price at "the monopoly price," be- 
cause it should take consumers' attitudes 
toward fairness as a given. 
I can further consider some limit results 
as the stakes become large in this game. Let 
the monopolist's costs and the consumer's 
value be C 
cX and V 
uX, respectively. I 
represent the percentage of surplus that the 
monopolist is able to extract by (z*- C)- 
(V - C). Algebra shows that this equals 
[2(V - C)/[1 + 2(V - C)], and the limit of 
this as X becomes arbitrarily large is 1. 
That is, the monopolist is able to extract 
"practically all" of the surplus, because re- 
jecting an offer for the sake of fairness is 
more costly for the consumer. 
Another interesting implication of the 
model is that dz*/dc > 0 for all parameter 
values. This means that the higher are the 
monopolist's costs, the higher the price the 
consumer will be willing to pay (assuming 
that the consumer knows the firm's costs). 
This is one interpretation of the results pre- 
sented in Thaler (1985): consumers are will- 
ing to pay more for the same product from 
a high-cost firm than from a low-cost firm. 
An area of economics where fairness has 
been widely discussed (more so than in 
monopoly pricing) is labor economics.19 I 
now present an extended example that re- 
sembles the "gift-exchange" view of the em- 
ployment relationship discussed in Akerlof 
(1982). Consider the situation in which a 
worker chooses an effort level and the firm 
simultaneously chooses a benefit level for 
the worker.20 Formally, the worker chooses 
either a high or low effort level: e E {H, L}. 
If e = H, the firm receives revenue R > 0, 
and the worker receives disutility y. If e = L, 
the firm receives no revenue, and the worker 
experiences no disutility. Simultaneously, 
the firm chooses a benefit level b e [0, R]. 
Material payoffs are as follows: 
/b1/2-y 
if e=H 
w 
bl/2 
if e=L 
rt(R 
- b)1/2 
if e= H and b < R 
F 
0 
if e=Lorb>R 
where 7rW is the worker's material payoffs, 
and WF is the firm's material payoffs.21 
This situation is essentially a continuous- 
strategy prisoner's dilemma, because each 
player has a dominant strategy: the worker 
maximizes his material payoffs by choosing 
e = L, and the firm maximizes its material 
payoffs by choosing b = 0. Thus, the unique 
Nash equilibrium is the nasty one in which 
e = L and b = 0. Because this outcome is 
also a mutual-min outcome, this will be a 
fairness equilibrium in which the players 
feel negatively toward each other. 
I now consider the possibility of a positive 
fairness equilibrium. First observe that the 
kindness of the worker to the firm is fw = 
if the worker puts in high effort, and fw = 
-- 
if the worker puts in low effort. This is 
because e = H involves the worker fully 
yielding along the Pareto frontier to the 
firm, and e = L means that the worker is 
choosing the best Pareto-efficient point for 
himself, given the firm's choice of b. 
Given the worker's choice of effort, the 
kindest the firm can be to the worker is to 
choose b= R; the least kind is clearly to 
choose b = 0. Therefore the equitable mate- 
rial payoff to the worker is R1/2/2- 
y if 
e = H, and R1/2/2 if e = L. Using this, one 
19For some examples discussing the role in labor 
economics of fairness and related issues, see Akerlof 
(1982), John Bishop (1987), James N. Baron (1988), 
David I. Levine (1991, 1993), and Rotemberg (1992). In 
Rabin (1992), I applied this model of fairness to several 
more examples from labor economics. 
20This model is a version of one suggested to me by 
James Montgomery (pers. comm.). 
21The assumptions that the parties are risk-averse 
and that the firm's payoff is 0 (rather than negative) if 
e = L are made for convenience and are not essential. 

1294 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
DECEMBER 1993 
can calculate that the kindness of the firm 
to the worker is given by fF = (b/R)1/2 
- 
Using this, consider the possibility of a 
positive fairness equilibrium. What is the 
firm's utility if it is commonly known that 
the worker is setting e = H? It is given by 
UF = (R - b)1/2+ 
[2 + (b/R)1/2J 
Thus, the firm will maximize its utility by 
setting dUF 7db = 0, and one gets the result 
that b* = R /(1+ 4R). With this level of b, 
the firm's kindness to the worker is fF = 
[1/(1 + 4R)]'/2 
- 
Finally, in order for this to constitute a 
fairness equilibrium, it must be that the 
worker would wish to set e = H rather than 
e = L. The two possible utility levels are: 
Uw(e 
H) = b1/2 _ y 
+ ([1(1+4R)] 
1/2_ 
Uw(e 
L) = b1/2 
+ ([1(1+4R)] 
1/2 
1}(- 
) 
Algebra yields the conclusion that the 
worker would not strictly prefer to choose 
e = L if and only if 
R < 0.25[1/(0.5 + Y)1/2_1]. 
For all such combinations of R and y, 
therefore, there exists a "gift-giving" equi- 
librium in which the worker sets e = H, and 
the firm gives the worker a bonus of b* = 
R /(1 + 4R). Note that the larger is y, the 
smaller R must be for there to exist a gift- 
giving equilibrium. The rpason for this is 
roughly as follows. If y is large, the worker 
is very tempted to "cheat" the firm by not 
working hard. The only way he will not 
cheat is if the firm is being very kind. But 
the firm's material costs to yielding a given 
percentage of profits to the worker in- 
creases as R increases; thus, only if R is 
very small will the firm give the worker a 
generous enough share of profits to induce 
the worker to be kind. 
Player 
2 
Grab 
Share 
Grab 
X,X 
2X,O 
Player 
1 
Share 
O,2X 
X,X 
FIGURE 5. EXAMPLE 5: THE GRABBING GAME 
In fact, if y 2 2, then there is no gift- 
giving equilibrium, no matter how small is 
R. This is because the firm's material incen- 
tives are such that it will choose to be 
unkind to the worker, so that the worker 
will choose to be unkind to the firm. Thus, 
overall the model says that workers and 
firms will cooperate if neither is too tempted 
by material concerns to cheat. 
V. Fairness and Welfare 
I consider now some welfare implications 
of fairness.22 My perspective here is that 
the full utility functions (combining material 
payoffs and "fairness payoffs") are the util- 
ity functions with which to determine social 
welfare. As such, I believe one should care 
not solely about how concerns for fairness 
support or interfere with material efficiency, 
but also about how these concerns affect 
people's overall welfare. 
Consider Example 5 (see Fig. 5). In this 
game, two people are shopping, and there 
are two cans of soup left. Each person can 
either try to grab both cans, or not try to 
grab. If both grab or both do not grab, they 
each get one can; if one grabs, and the 
22Robert H. Frank (1988, 1990) and others have 
explored how the existence of various emotions are 
understandable as adaptive evolutionary features of 
humans. While this view of emotions as "adaptive" 
may be broadly correct, Frank himself emphasizes that 
emotions can also be destructive in many situations. 
People's propensity for revenge can be harmful as well 
as helpful. My model of people's preferences for fair- 
ness will help economists do exactly what is done with 
"material" preferences-study 
how these preferences 
play out in different economic settings. 

VOL. 83 NO. 5 
RABIN: INCORPORATING FAIRNESS INTO GAME THEORY 
1295 
other does not, then the grabber gets both 
cans. This is a constant-sum version of the 
prisoner's dilemma: each player has a domi- 
nant strategy, and the unique Nash equilib- 
rium is (grab, grab). As in the prisoner's 
dilemma, the noncooperative (grab, grab) 
outcome is a fairness equilibrium, no matter 
the value of X. For small X, however, the 
positive, mutual-max outcome (share, share) 
is also a fairness equilibrium. Moreover, 
because these two fairness equilibria yield 
the same material payoffs, (share, share) 
always Pareto-dominates (grab, grab). 
Shopping for minor items is a situation in 
which people definitely care about material 
payoffs, and this concern drives the nature 
of the interaction; but they probably do not 
care a great deal about individual items. If 
two people fight over a couple of cans of 
goods, the social grief and bad tempers are 
likely to be of greater importance to the 
people than whether they get the cans. In- 
deed, while both (grab, grab) and (share, 
share) are fairness equilibria when material 
payoffs are arbitrarily small, the overall util- 
ity in each equilibrium is bounded away 
from zero.23 As the material payoffs involved 
become arbitrarily small, equilibrium utility 
levels do not necessarily become arbitrarily 
small. This is realistic: no matter how minor 
the material implications, people's well- 
being is affected by the friendly or un- 
friendly behavior of others. 
In Example 5, as with many examples in 
this paper, there is both a strictly positive 
and a strictly negative fairness equilibrium. 
Are there games that contain only positive 
or only negative fairness equilibria? If there 
are, this could be interpreted as saying that 
there are some economic situations that en- 
dogenously determine the friendliness or 
hostility of the people involved. More gen- 
erally, one could consider the question of 
which types of economic structures are likely 
to generate which types of emotions. 
The prisoner's dilemma illustrates that 
there do exist situations that endogenously 
generate hostility. Applying Proposition 5, 
the only fairness equilibrium of the pris- 
oner's dilemma with very large material 
payoffs is the Nash equilibrium, where both 
players defect. This fairness equilibrium is 
strictly negative. Interpreting a negative 
fairness equilibrium as a situation in which 
parties become hostile to each other, this 
implies that if mutual cooperation is bene- 
ficial, but each person has an irresistible 
incentive to cheat when others are cooper- 
ating, then people will leave the situation 
feeling hostile. 
Are there opposite, happier situations, in 
which the strategic logic of a situation dic- 
tates that people will depart on good terms? 
In other words, are there games for which 
all fairness equilibria yield strictly positive 
outcomes? Proposition 6 shows that the an- 
swer is no.24 
PROPOSITION 6: In every game, there ex- 
ists a weakly negative fairness equilibrium. 
Proposition 6 states that it is never guar- 
anteed that people will part with positive 
feelings. It implies a strong asymmetry in 
my model of fairness: there is a bias toward 
negative feelings. What causes this asymme- 
try? Recall that if a player is maximizing his 
own material payoffs, then he is being either 
mean or neutral to the other player, be- 
cause being "nice" inherently involves sacri- 
ficing material well-being. Thus, while there 
are situations in which material self-interest 
tempts a player to be mean even if other 
players are being kind, material self-interest 
will never tempt a player to be kind when 
other players are being mean, because the 
23In particular, the utility from (share, share) is 
positive for each player, and the utility from (grab, 
grab) is negative for each player: (share, share) 
Pareto-dominates (grab, grab). This again highlights 
the fact that social concerns take over when material 
pavoffs are small. 
24The proof of Proposition 6 invokes the existence 
theorem of GPS, which applies only if the kindness 
functions are continuous, so that technically I have 
established this result only when applying variants of 
the kindness functions that are continuous. See Ap- 
pendix A for a discussion of the continuity assumption. 

1296 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
DECEMBER 1993 
only way to be kind is to go against one's 
material self-interest. 
VI. Discussion and Conclusion 
The notion of fairness in this paper cap- 
tures several important regularities of be- 
havior but leaves out other issues. Evidence 
indicates, for instance, that people's notions 
of fairness are heavily influenced by the 
status quo and other reference points. For 
instance, Kahneman et al. (1986a,b) illus- 
trate that the consumer's view of the fair- 
ness of prices charged by a firm can be 
heavily influenced by what that firm has 
charged in the past. 
Extending the model to more general sit- 
uations will create issues that do not arise in 
the simple two-person, normal-form, com- 
plete-information games discussed in this 
paper. The central distinction between 
two-person games and multiperson games is 
likely to be how a person behaves when he 
is hostile to some players but friendly to- 
ward others. The implications are clear if he 
is able to choose whom to help and whom 
to hurt; it is more problematic if he must 
choose either to help everybody or to hurt 
everybody, such as when choosing the con- 
tribution level to a public good. Does one 
contribute to reward those who have con- 
tributed or not contribute to punish those 
who have not contributed. 
Extending the model to incomplete-infor- 
mation games is essential for applied re- 
search, but doing so will lead to important 
new issues. Because the theory depends so 
heavily on the motives of other players, and 
because interpreting other players' motives 
depends on beliefs about their payoffs and 
information, incomplete information is likely 
to have a dramatic effect on decision-mak- 
ing. Extending the model to sequential 
games is also essential for applied research. 
In conventional game theory, observing past 
behavior can provide information; in psy- 
chological games, it can conceivably change 
the motivations of the players. An impor- 
tant issue arises: can players "force" emo- 
tions; that is, can a first-mover do something 
that will compel a second player to regard 
him positively? One might imagine, for in- 
stance, that an analogue to Proposition 6 
Player 
2 
Share 
Grab 
Trust 
6X,6X 
0,12X 
Player 
1 
Dissolve 
5X,5X 
5X,5X 
FIGURE 6. EXAMPLE 6: LEAVING A PARTNERSHIP 
might no longer be true, and sequential 
games could perhaps be used as mecha- 
nisms that guarantee positive emotions. 
Finally, future research can also focus on 
modeling additional emotions. In Example 
6, for instance, my model predicts no coop- 
eration, whereas it seems plausible that co- 
operation would take place (see Fig. 6).25 
This game represents the following situa- 
tion. Players 1 and 2 are partners on a 
project that has thus far yielded total profits 
of 1OX. Player 1 must now withdraw from 
the project. If player 1 dissolves the part- 
nership, the contract dictates that the play- 
ers split the profits fifty-fifty. But total prof- 
its would be higher if player 1 leaves his 
resources in the project. To do so, however, 
he must forgo his contractual rights and 
trust player 2 to share the profits after the 
project is completed. So, player 1 must de- 
cide whether to "dissolve" or to "trust"; if 
he trusts player 2, then player 2 can either 
"grab" or "share." 
What will happen? According to the no- 
tion of fairness in this paper, the only 
(pure-strategy) equilibrium is for player 1 to 
split the profits now, yielding an inefficient 
solution. The desirable outcome (trust, 
share) is not possible because player 2 will 
deviate. The reason is that he attributes no 
positive motive to player 1-while 
it is true 
that player 1 trusted player 2, he did so 
simply to increase his own expected mate- 
rial payoff. No kindness was involved. 
One might think that (trust, share) is a 
reasonable outcome. This would be the out- 
come, for instance, if it is assumed that 
25 
A related example was first suggested to me by Jim 
Fearon (pers. comm.). 

VOL. 83 NO. 5 
RABIN: INCORPORATING FAIRNESS INTO GAME THEORY 
1297 
players wish to be kind to those who trust 
them. If player 1 plays "trust" rather than 
"split," he is showing he trusts player 2. If 
player 2 feels kindly toward player 1 as a 
result of this trust, then he might not grab 
all the profits. If it is concluded that the 
idea that people are motivated to reward 
trust is psychologically sound, then it could 
be incorporated into formal models. 
APPENDIX 
A: 
THE KINDNESS 
FUNCTION 
CAN BE 
GENERALIZED 
There is a broad class of kindness func- 
tions for which all of the results of this 
paper hold. Indeed, the proofs of all results 
contained in the body of the paper are 
general enough that they establish the re- 
sults for the kindness functions that I now 
define. 
Definition Al requires that (i) fairness 
cannot lead to infinitely positive or infinitely 
negative utility, and (ii) how kind player i is 
being to player j is an increasing function of 
how high a material payoff player i is giving 
player j. 
Definition Al: A kindness 
function 
is 
bounded and increasing if: 
(i) there exists a number N such that 
fi(ai, bj)E [- N, N] for all aE Si and 
b. ES S; and 
(ii) fi(ai, bj) > fM(a', b1) if and only if 
7rr(bj, ai) > rj(bj, a'). 
Definition A2 requires that the payoff 
that player j "deserves" is strictly between 
player j's worst and best Pareto-efficient 
payoffs, so long as the Pareto frontier is not 
a singleton. 
Definition A2: Consider 11(bj), Trjh(bj), 
and 
Trj(b1) as defined in the paper. A kindness 
function fi(ai,kb) is a Pareto split if there 
exists some rje(bj) such that: 
(i) irj(bj, ai) > 7rje(bj) implies that fi(ai, bj) 
> 0; 7j(bj, ai) = irr(b1) implies that 
f.(a, b) =0; and irr (bj, a ) < wrje(bj) im- 
plies thiat fi(ai, bj) < 0; 
(ii) Trjh(b) 2 Trje(bj) 
2 nrj(bj); and 
(iii) if 1rjh(bj) > rjf(bj), then irjh(bj) > rje(bj) 
Propositions 1, 2, and 6 are all true for 
any kindness function meeting Definitions 
Al and A2. Propositions 3, 4, and 5, how- 
ever, pertain to when material payoffs are 
made arbitrarily large or arbitrarily small. 
In order for these results to hold, one must 
guarantee that notions of the fairness of 
particular outcomes do not dramatically 
change when all payoffs are doubled (say). 
Definition A3 is a natural way to do so. 
Definition A3: A kindness function fi(ai, bj) 
is affine if changing all payoffs for both 
players by the same affine transformation 
does not change the value of fi(ai, bj). 
All the propositions in this paper hold for 
any kindness function meeting Definitions 
Al, A2, and A3. One substantial generaliza- 
tion allowed for here is that the kindness 
function can be sensitive to affine transfor- 
mations of one player's payoffs. If all of 
player 2's payoffs are doubled, then it may 
be that fairness dictates that he get 
more-or 
less-than 
before. The definition 
and all of the limit results simply character- 
ize what happens if both players' payoffs 
are comparably changed. 
Knowing that the general results of this 
paper hold for a large class of kindness 
functions is also important should existence 
be problematic. While fairness equilibria ex- 
ist in all of the examples of this paper, I 
have proved no general existence result and 
cannot invoke the existence theorem of GPS, 
because of possible discontinuities. 
The kindness function in the text can be 
discontinuous in b1 at points where irjh(bj) 
= 
-rjm,n(bj); at such points, lI(bj) is a single 
point, and fi(ai, bj) is set equal to zero 
independent of ai. The discontinuity comes 
from the fact that, by normalizing the kind- 
ness function by [ 
h(bj) - 
1rrjin(bj)], the 
kindness function can be bounded away 
from zero even when HO(b1) is arbitrarily 
small. While I chose this kindness function 
so as to emphasize that kindness or mean- 
ness can be large issues even when the 
stakes are small, this property could be made 
less extreme. For instance, one could choose 

1298 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
DECEMBER 1993 
the kindness function as 
g(ai, bj) 
j(bj , a).- 
rje(bj) 
(1 - y)[ Tjh(bj)- 
7'rin(bj) + y(7rmax _ 7rmin)] 
where wrax and <r"m are player j's maxi- 
mum and minimum payoffs in the entire 
game. This kindness function is well-defined 
for all y E (0,1], so long as Tjmax + Trn 
(which is true unless one has a game in 
which no decisions by either player could 
possibly affect player j's payoff). A second 
type of discontinuity in the kindness func- 
tions is that 7r-(b2) can be discontinuous in 
b2. This discontinuity can be smoothed out 
with the following definition: for D > 0, let 
72e( b2, D) 
- maxb EB2{7r2(b*) + Dlb2 - b*11}. 
It can be shown that 72-(b2, D) is a well- 
defined function and is continuous in b2. To 
construct a continuous kindness function 
(and thus allow the application of the GPS 
existence proof), one need merely replace 
7w by wr(b2, D) in the above definition. It 
can be shown (proof available from the au- 
thor upon request) that there exists a D > 0 
defined for each game such that the result- 
ing kindness function satisfies Definitions 
Al, A2, and A3 for all y. Moreover, by 
choosing y arbitrarily close to 0 and D 
arbitrarily large, one essentially defines 
kindness functions that are "smoothed" ver- 
sions of that used in the paper. 
While the precise kindness function used 
is not important to the qualitative results of 
this paper, the way I specify the overall 
utility function is perhaps more restrictive. 
One aspect that clearly determines some of 
the results in this paper is the fact that I 
completely exclude "pure altruism"; that is, 
I assume that unless player 2 is being kind 
to player 1, player 1 will have no desire to 
be kind to player 2. Psychological evidence 
suggests that, while people are substantially 
motivated by the type of "contingent altru- 
ism" I have incorporated into the model, 
pure altruism can also sometimes be impor- 
tant. 
One natural way to expand the utility 
function to incorporate pure altruism would 
be as follows: 
Ui(ai, bj, ci) 
-ri(ai, bj) 
+ [ a + (1- a)fj(bj, ci)] [1 + fi(ai, bj)] 
where a E [0, 1]. 
In this utility function, if a > 0, then the 
player i will wish to be kind to player j even 
if player j is being "neutral" to player i. 
The relative importance of pure versus con- 
tingent altruism is captured by the parame- 
ter a; if a is small, then outcomes will be 
much as in the model of this paper; if a is 
close to 1, then pure altruism will dominate 
behavior. 
As discussed above with regard to the 
kindness function, my model assumes that 
the fairness utility is completely indepen- 
dent of the scale of the material payoffs. 
Consider a situation in which a proposer's 
offer to split $1 evenly is rejected by a 
decider. My model says that the proposer 
will leave the situation unhappy not only 
because he has no money, but because he 
was badly treated. Yet my model implies 
that the proposer will be as unhappy, but no 
more so, when leaving a situation in which 
the decider rejected an offer to split $1 
million evenly. 
This seems unrealistic-the 
bitterness he 
feels should be larger the greater the harm 
done. The assumption could, however, be 
relaxed while maintaining all the general 
results of the paper. I could specify the 
utility function as: 
Ui(ai, bj, ci) 
- ri(ai, bj) + G(X) - fj(bj, ci) [1 + fi(ai, bj)] 
where G(X) 
is positive and increasing 
in X.26 
26This specification and one of the conditions men- 
tioned to maintain the limit results were suggested by 
Roland Benabou (pers. comm.). 

VOL. 83 NO. 5 
RABIN: INCORPORATING FAIRNESS INTO GAME THEORY 
1299 
This might create problems for the limit 
results of the paper. However, the condi- 
tions that G(X)/X 
-> 0 as X -X o and that 
G(X) is bounded away from 0 as X -)0 
would suffice for all propositions to hold. In 
this case, I am assuming that a person's 
fairness utility is less sensitive to the scale of 
payoffs than is his material utility, not that 
it is totally insensitive. 
APPENDIX B: PROOFS 
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 1: 
Since (a1, a2) is a Nash equilibrium, both 
players must be maximizing their material 
payoffs. First, suppose that (al, a2) is a 
mutual-max outcome. Then both f1 and f2 
must be nonnegative. Thus, both players 
have positive regard for the other. Since 
each player is choosing a strategy that maxi- 
mizes both his own material well-being and 
the material well-being of the other player, 
this must maximize his overall utility. 
Next, suppose that (a1, a2) is a mutual-min 
outcome. Then f1 and f2 will both be non- 
positive, so that each player will be moti- 
vated to decrease the material well-being of 
the other. Since he is doing so while simul- 
taneously maximizing his own material 
well-being, this must maximize his utility. 
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 2: 
Suppose that an outcome has one player 
being positive (fi > 0), while the other player 
is not being positive (fj < 0). If fi > 0, then 
it must be that player i could increase his 
payoff in such a way that player j would be 
harmed, simply by changing his strategy to 
maximize his own material interest. If f; < 0, 
it is inconsistent with utility maximization 
for player i not to do so; therefore, this 
outcome cannot be a fairness equilibrium. 
The only outcomes consistent with fairness 
equilibrium, therefore, are those for which 
both fi and fj are strictly positive, or nei- 
ther is. This establishes the proposition. 
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 3: 
As X -) 0, the gain in material payoffs 
from changing a strategy approaches zero, 
and eventually it is dominated by the fair- 
ness payoffs. If (al,a2) 
is a strictly positive 
mutual-max outcome, each player would 
strictly prefer to play ai, since this uniquely 
maximizes the fairness product. Thus, this is 
a fairness equilibrium. If (a1, a2) is a strictly 
negative mutual-min outcome, each player 
would strictly prefer to play ai, since this 
uniquely maximizes the fairness product. 
Thus, this too would be a fairness equilib- 
rium. 
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 4: 
Suppose that (a1, a2) is not a Nash equi- 
librium. Then (without loss of generality) 
player 1 is not maximizing his material pay- 
offs. 
Suppose that player 1 is not minimizing 
player 2's payoffs. Then he is not minimiz- 
ing f1. Given that player 1 is also not maxi- 
mizing his own material payoffs, this can be 
maximizing behavior only if f2 > 0. Player 2 
will choose f2 > 0 only if f1 > 0. Thus, both 
f1 and f2 are greater than 0; but if the 
material payoffs are small, this means that 
the players must choose to maximize f1 and 
f2, so that this must be a mutual-max out- 
come. 
Suppose that player 1 is not maximizing 
player 2's payoffs. Then he is not maximiz- 
ing f1. If the payoffs are small, and given 
that player 1 is not maximizing his own 
payoffs, this implies that f2 < 0. This means, 
as payoffs are small, that player 1 will mini- 
mize player 2's payoffs, so that f1 < 0. If he 
does so, player 2 will in turn minimize player 
l's payoffs. Thus, this outcome is a min-min 
outcome. This establishes that if (a,, a2) 
is 
not a mutual-max, mutual-min, or Nash 
equilibrium, then it will not be a fairness 
equilibrium for small enough X. 
Now suppose that (a1, a2) is a Nash equi- 
librium, but one in which each player could 
lower the other player's material payoffs by 
changing his strategy. Suppose that (a1, a2) 
is not a mutual-max outcome. Then (without 
loss of generality) player 1 could increase 
player 2's material payoffs. Since player 1 is 
maximizing his own material payoffs in a 
way that hurts player 2, it is known that 
f1 < 0. This can be optimal for small X only 
if f2 < 0. If f2 < 0, then earlier arguments 
imply that this must be a mutual-min out- 
come. Suppose f2 = 0. Then this can be 

1300 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
DECEMBER 1993 
optimal for player 2 only if she has no 
choice of lowering player l's payoffs; other- 
wise, the fact that f1 < 0 would compel her 
to change strategies. This condition on 
player 2's choices directly contradicts the 
assumption that she could lower player l's 
payoffs. This establishes the proposition. 
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 5: 
If (a1, a2) is a strict Nash equilibrium, 
then the difference in material payoffs from 
playing the equilibrium strategy versus a 
nonequilibrium strategy becomes arbitrarily 
large as X becomes arbitrarily large. Be- 
cause the fairness gains and losses are inde- 
pendent of X, ai eventually becomes a strict 
best reply to a1 as X becomes large. 
If (a1, a2) is not a Nash equilibrium, then, 
for at least one player, the benefit in mate- 
rial payoffs from deviating from (a1, a2) be- 
comes arbitrarily large as X becomes arbi- 
trarily large. Because the fairness gains and 
losses are independent of X, ai is eventu- 
ally dominated by some other strategy with 
respect to ai as X becomes large. 
PROOF OF PROPOSITION 6: 
From the material game, consider the psy- 
chological game from the preferences Vi= 
7ri(ai, bj) + min[ fj(ci, bj), O] min[ fi(ai, bj), O]. 
When the kindness functions are continu- 
ous, GPS's general existence result means 
that this game has at least one equilibrium, 
(a*, a*). I will now argue that any such 
equilibrium is also a fairness equilibrium. 
First, I show that, for i = 1, 2, fi(a*, a*) < 
0. Suppose fi(a*,a*)> 
0. Let a' be such 
that at E argmaxa 
sITi(a, 
a7 ). Then 
i(a ati j, 
a* ) > Vi ( a*, al*, a* ) 
which contradicts the premise. This is be- 
cause the material payoff to i is higher with 
a' than with a*, and because fM(a, a*) < 0, 
so that the fairness payoff cannot be any 
lower than from a*. 
Thus, for i-=1,2, fi(aa*,a*)<0; 
but this 
implies that, for each player, maximizing 
V(a 
, a*, 
a*) 
is the same as maximizing 
Ui(ai,aj,a*). 
Thus, (a>,a 
) is a fairness 
equilibrium. 
REFERENCES 
Akerlof, George, "Labor Contracts as a Par- 
tial Gift Exchange," Quarterly Journal of 
Economics, November 1982, 97, 543-69. 
Akerlof, George and Dickens, William T., "The 
Economic Consequences 
of Cognitive 
Dissonance," American Economic Re- 
view, June 1982, 72, 307-19. 
Andreoni, James, (1988a) "Privately Provided 
Public Goods in a Large Economy: The 
Limits of Altruism," Journal of Public 
Economics, February 1988, 35, 57-73. 
, (1988b) "Why Free Ride? Strate- 
gies and Learning in Public Goods Exper- 
iments," Journal of Public Economics, 
December 1988, 37, 291-304. 
Baron, James N., "The Employment Relation 
as a Social Relation," Journal of the 
Japanese and International Economies, 
December 1988, 2, 492-525. 
Bishop, John, "The Recognition and Reward 
of Employee Performance," Journal of 
Labor Economics, 
October 
1987, 5, 
S36-56. 
Dawes, Robyn M. and Thaler, Richard H., 
"Anomalies: Cooperation," Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, Summer 1988, 2, 
187-98. 
Frank, Robert H., Passions Within Reason: 
The Strategic Role of the Emotions, New 
York: Norton, 1988. 
, "A Theory of Moral Sentiments," 
in Jane J. Mansbridge, ed., Beyond Self- 
Interest, Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1990, pp. 71-96. 
Geanakoplos, John, Pearce, David and Stac- 
chetti, Ennio, "Psychological Games and 
Sequential Rationality," Games and Eco- 
nomic Behavior, March 1989, 1, 60-79. 
Gilboa, Itzhak and Schmeidler, David, "Infor- 
mation Dependent Games: Can Common 
Sense Be Common Knowledge?" Eco- 
nomics Letters, 1988, 27 (3), 215-21. 
Goranson, Richard E. and Berkowitz, Leonard, 
"Reciprocity and Responsibility Reac- 

VOL. 83 NO. 5 
RABIN: INCORPORATING FAIRNESS INTO GAME THEORY 
1301 
tions to Prior Help," Journal of Personal- 
ity and Social Psychology, February 1966, 
3, 227-32. 
Greenberg, Jerald, "Effects of Reward Value 
and Retaliative Power on Allocation De- 
cisions: Justice, Generosity or Greed?" 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol- 
ogy, April 1978, 36, 367-79. 
Greenberg, Martin S. and Frisch, David, "Ef- 
fect of Intentionality on Willingness to 
Reciporocate a Favor," Journal of Experi- 
mental Social Psychology, March 1972, 8, 
99-111. 
Guth, Werner, Schmittberger, Rolf and Schwarze, 
Bernd, "An Experimental Analysis of Ul- 
timatum Bargaining," Journal of Eco- 
nomic Behavior and Organization, De- 
cember 1982, 3, 367-88. 
Hoffman, Elizabeth and Spitzer, Matthew, "The 
Coase Theorem: Some Experimental 
Tests," Journal of Law and Economics, 
April 1982, 75, 73-98. 
Huang, Peter H. and Wu, Ho-Mou, "Emotional 
Responses in Litigation," International 
Review of Law and Economics, March 
1992, 12, 31-44. 
Isaac, R. Mark, McCue, Kenneth F. and Plott, 
Charles, "Public Goods Provision in an 
Experimental Environment," Journal of 
Public Economics, February 1985, 26, 
51-74. 
and Walker, James, (1988a) "Group 
Size Effects in Public Goods Provision: 
The Voluntary Contribution Mechanism," 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 
1988, 103, 179-99. 
and 
, (1988b) "Communica- 
tion and Free-Riding Behavior: The Vol- 
untary Contribution Mechanism," Eco- 
nomic Inquiry, October 1988, 26, 585-608. 
_ 
and Thomas, Susan H., "Di- 
vergent Evidence on Free Riding: An Ex- 
perimental Examination of Possible Ex- 
planations," Public Choice, 1984, 43 (2), 
113-49. 
Kahneman, Daniel, Knetsch, Jack L. and Thaler, 
Richard H., (1986a) "Fairness as a Con- 
straint on Profit Seeking: Entitlements in 
the Market," American Economic Review, 
September 1986, 76, 728-41. 
_ 
and _ 
_, (1986b) "Fair- 
ness and the Assumptions of Economics," 
Journal of Business, October 1986, 59, 
S285-S300. 
Kim, Oliver and Walker, Mark, "The Free 
Rider Problem: Experimental Evidence," 
Public Choice, 1984, 43 (1), 3-24. 
Kolpin, Van, "Equilibrium Refinements in 
Psychological Games," Games and Eco- 
nomic Behavior, 1993 (forthcoming). 
Leventhal, Gerald and Anderson, David, "Self- 
Interest and the Maintenance of Equity," 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol- 
ogy, May 1970, 15, 57-62. 
Levine, David I., "Cohesiveness, Productivity, 
and Wage Dispersion," Journal of Eco- 
nomic Behavior and Organization, March 
1991, 15, 237-55. 
, "Fairness, Markets, and Ability To 
Pay: Evidence from Compensation Exec- 
utives," American Economic Review, De- 
cember 1993, 83 (5), 1241-59. 
Marwell, Gerald and Ames, Ruth, "Economists 
Free Ride, Does Anyone Else?: Experi- 
ments on the Provision of Public Goods, 
IV," Journal of Public Economics, June 
1981, 15, 295-310. 
Mui, Vai-Lam, "Two Essays in the Eco- 
nomics of Institutions: I. Envy," Ph.D. 
dissertation, Department of Economics, 
University of California-Berkeley, 1992. 
Orbell, John M., Dawes, Robyn M. and van de 
Kragt, Alphons J. C., "Explaining Discus- 
sion Induced Cooperation," Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, May 
1978, 54, 811-19. 
Rabin, Matthew, "Incorporating Fairness Into 
Game Theory and Economics," Depart- 
ment of Economics Working Paper No. 
92-199, University of California-Berkeley, 
July 1992. 
Rotemberg, Julio J., "Human Relations in the 
Workplace," mimeo, Massachusetts Insti- 
tute of Technology, January 1992. 
Roth, Alvin E., Prasnikar, Vesna, Okuno- 
Fujiwara, Masahiro and Zamir, Shmuel, 
"Bargaining and Market Behavior in 
Jerusalem, Ljubljana, Pittsburgh, and 
Tokyo: An Experimental Study," Ameri- 
can Economic Review, December 1991, 
81, 1068-95. 
Thaler, Richard H., "Mental Accounting and 

1302 
THE AMERICAN ECONOMIC REVIEW 
DECEMBER 1993 
Consumer Choice," Marketing Science, 
Summer 1985, 4, 199-214. 
, "Anomalies: 
The 
Ultimatum 
Game," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 
Fall 1988, 2, 195-207. 
Train, Kenneth E., McFadden, Daniel L. and 
Goett, Andrew A., "Consumer Attitudes and 
Voluntary Rate Schedules for Public Util- 
ities," Review of Economics and Statistics, 
August 1987, 64, 383-91. 
van de Kragt, Alphons J. C., Orbell, John M. 
and Dawes, Robyn M., "The Minimal Con- 
tributing Set as a Solution to Public Goods 
Problems," American Political Science Re- 
view, March 1983, 77, 112-22. 
Weisbrod, Burton A., The Nonprofit Economy, 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1988.